Then they all set off for the field in a group. At the edge of the field, tata Francisco
carefully divided up the people, some would dig up the potatoes in one area, and
others in another area. After hearing their instructions, each worker began to dig
right away. Every potato plant was perfectly ripe, each root had 10, 13, 15
potatoes, and they were all enormous. All the workers, happy and longing for such
potatoes of their own, kept on digging, smiling, talking and shouting back and
forth.
Tata Fransiskupis wakin llamk'aqkunajina papa allaq churakullasqataq. Paypaq
allaynintaqa ni pipis atipaqchu kasqa. Wiskanata 4 jap'iykuytawankamaqa jukllata
sinchita waqtaspa ch'aki yurataqa karuman phawachisqa. Chaymantataq papataqa
tawamanta tawa kanastaman pallasqa. Kanastaman papata junt'achiytawantaq uman
pataman churaykuytawan tukuy rikunankupaqjina ñawinta ch'irmiykurispa papa
qutuman jich'aykusqa. Chayta rikuytawanqa tukuy yanapaqkunaqa t'aqllararikusqanku.
Juknintaq umanta patata juqharispallapuni kasqa. Fransiskuqa tukuymantapis astawan
jatun runa kasqa. Yana runa. Jatuchaq ch'apayuq. Sapa asiriptin ch'apan ukhumanta
yuraq kirun rikurikuq kasqa. Sumaq ñawi-sapa, Fransiskuqa lisu runa kaq kasqa.
Tata Francisco also started digging, just like all the other workers. No one could
dig like he could. As soon as he grabbed the spade, he sent a dry shrub flying with
one big thrust. After that, he picked up the potatoes four by four and put them in a
basket. After a filling a basket, he put it on his head so that everyone could see, and
closing his eyes he dumped the basket out onto the big pile of potatoes. After
seeing this, all the workers applauded. He raised his head up. Francisco was the
greatest man of all. A black man. With an enormous beard. Every time he smiled
his white teeth appeared through his beard. He had big eyes, Francisco was an
awful man.
-“¡Ajinata papataqa allana karaju!”- ñispa papata allaq watiqmanta churakusqa.
4 Wiskana = kaywan papata runakuna allanku.
4
Wiskana = people dig potatoes with this. [like a pickaxe]
25