because he beat mama Inkarna so hard, and his children too. Because of this, every
time tata Francisco went to kumpa Phillip's chicería to drink, mama Inkarna
immediately took her children and escaped to a rock hut a little ways beyond her
house, in order to avoid fighting with her husband when he came back. They next
day she came back at dawn. Mama Inkarna was a small woman. Olive-skinned.
Thick black braids. White hat. Black sandals. She always wore a green skirt.
Kalallusta ayllupiqa tata Fransiskup wasillanpi juk uritu kaq kasqa. Chay k'acha q'umir
uritutaqa wawqin Chapare' llaqtamanta apamuytawan chunka suqtayuq waranqapi
ranqhasqa. Chay urituqa sumaqta qhichwa simita parlayta yachakusqa. Runakunata
parlaqta uyariytawankamaqa payqa paykunawan parlariyta munaq pacha kasqa.
Durasnu sach'a patamanta imallatapis parlarimuqpuni kasqa.
There was just a single parrot in all of Kalallusta, in tata Francisco's house. His
brother had brought this beautiful green parrot from the Chapare and sold it to him
for 16 Bolivianos. This parrot knew how to speech Quechua well. As soon as it
heard someone say something, it wanted to talk to them. It was always on top of
the peach tree talking about something.
Juk Intichaw p’unchaw tata Fransiskuqa Lindi Q’asapi¹0 Katalina chulanwan sumaqta
aysaykacharinakuchkasqanku. Mama Inkarnataq sapitan wasipi yakuta aqhananpaq juk
jatun paylapi t'impuchiyta qallarichkasqa. Chayllapi urituqa, ajinata parlayta qallarisqa:
One Sunday Tata Francisco was in Linda Q'asa, flirting with his chola, Katalina.
Mama Inkarna was alone in the house, starting to bowl the water for chicha in a big
pot. Suddenly, the parrot started to talk:
-“Mama Inkarnita, Lisu Fransiskuqa chulanwan karichkan, Mama Inkarnita, Fransisku
9
Chapare = juk jatun ayllu, achkha sach’akuna tiyan, misk’i puquykuna chay chirupi puqun.
9 Chapare a big town, where there are many trees and they grow good fruit.
10
Lindi Q'asa = chay chirupi tawa ñan tinkuchkan chayrayku ajina sutin.
10
¹⁰ Lindi Q'asa = this town is called this because four roads meet here.
32