In 1960, tata Victor Paz Estenssoro's men wanted to head out to Ukureña, but first
they tried to silence the town of Yambata. Yambata is a big town in between Norte
Potosí and Cochabamba. Because of this, tthe men came through Yambata twice
and sacked the town, they beat the people, killed the animals, went into the
townspeople's homes and took all of their things for themselves. The houses were
silent, there was nothing left. The fighting and killing went on for three months in
Yambata. Victor Paz Estenssoro's men, tata Fermin Torrico, Pedro Carita and
Rosendo Causiri, really made the people in Yambata suffer. "You're communists"
they accused. They wanted to capture the leaders of Yambata and kill them. They
were always saying, "We have to make the communists disappear".
Tata Hernan Peraltaqa Yambatapi paqarikurqa ñin. Chay pachaqa pay Llallaguapi20
qhuyapi llamk'achkasqa. Yambata ayllunta jinata ñak'arichichkasqankuta yachaspataq
qhuyamanta iskay camionadas ñisqa qharikuna yanapaq jamusqanku. Chantapis
Yambatapiqa kimsa chunka Beneméritos ñisqakuna Chaco awqanakuymanta
karqankuraq ñin, jinapitaq chay ch'ampaypiqa yawarninkuta pampaman qhallispa
sinchita maqanakusqanku. Kimsa killa junt'ata chay maqanaku kasqa Yambata
ayllupiqa. Chaypiqa, achkha runa wañupusqanku, runa wañuptinqa jinapi kurkun
wikch'urayakuq ñin. Runap chakinta uchayqa runap makinta allqukuna achuspa
wasikunakama chayachimuq ñin. Kay ch'ampayqa sinchi llakiy kasqa.
Tata Hernan Peralta was born in Yambata. At that time, he was working in a mine
in Llallagua20. When he learned about how the people in his town of Yambata
were suffering, he came from the mine in two trucks with men to help. In Yambata
there were still thirty Beneméritos left from the Chaco war, they fought one
another hard, their blood falling to the ground in the battle. This battle went on for
three months in Yambata. Many people died, and when someone died like this his
body was left where it was. The dogs took a person's hands or feet in their mouths
and brought them to their house. The battle was very sad.
20
20
Llallagua = juk ayllu maypichus juk qhuya tiyan.
Llallagua = a small town where there is a mine.
73