298
plate or bowl. Ex: jun sol, one sip. cha sol 'ulul, two sips of atole. 'ox sol tek, three sips of
food.
solmajih, vin. To cause drying and flaking off of surrounding skin (a sore). Ex: solmaj t'ayin,
My sore is causing drying and flaking of my skin.
solok, n (ch'anh). Plant name. A vine (ch'anh) with leaves resembling a five-pointed star, found
in San Mateo. A large vine, it climbs trees, and is used for tying things (e.g., the rails of a corral).
Br 8555, 11479. Clematis dioica, C. grossa. Virgins Bower.
solom k'uh, n (lum). Place name: Solomcú, San Rafael La Independencia. < Kanjobal.
somo', vtr. To mess something up, e.g., to shuffle a bunch of papers that were orderly laid out, or
for the wind to blow in a milpa and make the stalks disorderly, leaning in all different directions.
somchajih, vin (vtr-pas). To become disorderly, messed up.
son, n (te'). Marimba. Ex: jun son, a marimba. son winh, his marimba. sonal k'inh, marimba(s)
for a festival. NB: San Mateo was said to have some 200 neighborhood marimba groups in a
population of about 2000; these groups are important politically.
sop-, vpo root. To be blind.
sopan sopan -sat, stv phrase. Blind.
sopin, n. Insult to blind people, or, a blind animal.
sopu sat, n phrase. Insult to a blind person.
sot, n (nok'). Snake's rattle (from a rattlesnake). Each year in the five-day period hoye k'uh the
snakes change their skin, even their eyes, and the rattles are left from this. Ex: sot chan, the
snake's rattle. sotal chan, the snake's rattle. NB: hoye k'uh falls around Carnaval, and is
apparently the continuation of the Uayeb New Year's festivals.
sotz', n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). Bat. Spanish "murciélago." Diphylla ecandata centralis and
Desmodus rotundus murinus, the vampire bats (Jorge A. Ibarra, Mamíferos de Guatemala, pp. 27
et passim). The term also applies to any bat, vampire or insectivore, or whatever. NB: The
gender markers are the same as those for birds; the principle of classification of animals is
manner of locomotion (Nicholas A. Hopkins, 1980, "Chuj animal names and their classification,"
Journal of Mayan Linguistics 2(1):13-39).
sotz' te', n (te'). Plant name. A hot country hardwood tree (tete') used in hot country for house