303
takinh, adj. Dry.
takinh chip'ej, n phrase. Dried meat, either roasted slowly and dried for several days
over the fire, or roasted slowly, salted, cut into strips, and sun-dried. Cf. tz'ap'te'ej, takki
chip'ej. Ex: stakinh chip'ejal wakax, dried beef. stakinh chip'ej, his dried meat.
takinh melem, n (lum). Place name. Río Seco, San Mateo. Literally, Dry River Bed. An
aldea where Santa Eulalia Kanjobal is spoken. Abandoned or destroyed in the civil war
(Manz 1988:84).
takkih, vin. To dry, e.g., green pottery.
takki chip'ej, vin phrase. For meat to dry in the sun, i.e., in the preparation of takinh
chip'ej. Ex: stakki chip'ej, The meat is drying.
takih, vin. To undergo a change in epoch, with changing habits, ideas, etc., in a bad time in
which change is taking place and old ideas are forgotten or neglected. Ex: tzon takih, We are
changing.
tákoh, n. < Spanish "taco." Fiber wadding that goes between the gunpowder and the shot; it
consists of bits of "pita" (maguey fiber) broken up and rolled between the hands to form a small
ball. Ex: stákoh, his wadding. stákohil stákohal, wadding to be used for a gun, e.g., stákohil
'alkapus, the gun's wadding.
=
tak'a', vtr. To wish for something, to want something.
tak'a', vtr implied but not attested. To answer, to give a response.
tak'ej, vtr. To give up something, quit doing something, say farewell to something. Also,
for a dying man to say goodbye.
tak'anel, n. A farewell.
tak'wej, vtr. To answer someone, or to repeat what someone says, or to give a set
response (as in prayers); or, to promise to do something. Ex: sko tak'wej, We answer, we
respond. tzach ko tak'wej, We answer you. tzin tak'wej, I promise.
tak'wih, vin. To answer. Ex: tzonh tak'wih, We answer.
tak'inh, n (k'en). A large bell, e..g., a church bell. Ex: k'en tak'inh, the bell. stak'inh, his bell.
stak'inhal, peals of the bell for some purpose. stak'inhal winh, bells for his death. NB: In other
Mayan languages, e.g., Chol, the cognate tak'in < *ta'-k'in, "excrement of the sun," refers to