318
titak chonhap', n phrase. The edges of town. Ex: sp'at hep' 'ix t'ay kulus t'ay titak chonhap', The
women go to the crosses on the edges of town. stitakil chonhap' = titak chonhap', the edges of
town. stitak chonhap'il, the crosses around town where rituals are performed.
titkan, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). A bird like a woodpecker (Spanish "pájaro carpintero") but
larger. Similar to Yellow-bellied Sapsucker but has a crest of mixed dark brown and white, the
same colors as the body, and is much smaller. Song is tit.
titz'am, n. Salt mine, salt rights (< ti' 'atz'am). Ex: 'ay stitz'am winh, He has a turn at taking out
salt. stup titz'amil, He pays his salt rights. *stitz'amil.
tiyox, n (winh, 'ix). Twins (children). Ex: stiyox, his twins. stiyoxal yune', the twins among the
children.
to toh, adv. A little while ago. Ex: toto 'ix p'atih, He just now left. = toto wal 'ix p'atih.
to xoh, adv. Almost, Spanish "ya mero."
to'om, n (te'). = tom. Plant name. A plant that is mashed and thrown into rivers to stun fish. Ex:
te tom, the plant. Cupania dentata.
toch-, vpo root. To be too big.
tochan tochan, stv. A hat that is too big; either it falls over the ears, or the brim is too
wide.
tochu ti', n phrase. Insult to people with thick lips.
tochu jolom, n phrase. Overly hairy head; full head of hair.
tocho', vtr. To harvest maize by grabbing the ear and the stalk and ripping the ear downward,
leaving the husk on the stalk. = kocho'.
toch, num cl (1a, A6). Acts of harvesting corn by ripping the ear out of the husk, on the
stalk. Ex: cha toch, two ripping acts.
toch (+N), num cl (1b, A6). = koch. Acts of harvesting maize ears (N) by ripping them
out of the husk, leaving the shucks on the stalk. Ex: cha toch 'ajan, two acts of harvesting
maize ears.
toj, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). A snake, pencil thin, about 2 feet long, yellowish black on top. Some are
yellow-bellied, some orange-bellied. A bad omen if they cross your trail. Found in the bush. Said
(but not demonstrated) to have a needle in their tail.