tzam (+N), num cl (3b, A31a). Sounds of a scythe cutting through dry grass, wheat, etc.
Or, the sound of a drop of water falling on a hot griddle. Ex: cha tzam, two wheat-cutting
sounds. jun tzam tríguh, a sound of wheat cutting. cha tzam ha', two sounds of sizzling
drops of water. Or, the bursting of a flash fire (not the sound), jun tzam k'ak', a flash fire.
tzama', vtr. To cut wheat with a sickle. Ex: tzin tzam hin tríguh, I cut my wheat with a sickle.
tzam (+N), num cl (1a, 1b; A31b). Acts of cutting N (wheat, etc.) with a sickle. Ex: cha
tzam, two strokes with a sickle. cha tzam tríguh, two strokes of a sickle, cutting wheat.
tzamanh (+N), num cl (2c, 017a). Bunches of N (wheat, etc.), of the size cut by one sickle
stroke. Ex: cha tzamanh tríguh, two bunches of cut wheat.
tzana', vtr. To lift one foot. = tzank'e'ih. Ex: tzin tzana', I lift one foot.
tzan, num cl (1a, A26). Hops on one foot. Ex: jun tzan, one hop on one foot. cha tzan, two
jops on one foot.
tzan (+N), num cl (1b, A26). Acts of lifting N (one foot). Ex: cha tzan wok, two times
lifting my foot.
tzanan k'e -ok, stv phrase. Walking with one foot raised, like a dog with a hurt foot. Ex:
tzanan k'e yok, His foot is raised.
tzantzan, n. A children's game of hopping around on one foot. Ex: kak' tzantzan, Let's play
Hop!
tzankin, stv. Hopping on one foot, or walking touching the toe of one foot to the ground
but not putting weight on it (e.g., a person on crutches). Ex: tzankinin, I'm hopping. tzankin
hin p'eyih, I'm hopping around.
tzank'e'ih, vtr-dir. = tzana', To lift one foot. Ex: tzin tzank'e wok, I lift my foot.
tzapalúteh, n (lum). Place name. The ruins, or the nearby mountain, across the river niwan
titz'am from San Mateo, above the Barillas highway, near the crest, above and approximately north
of the cantón k'axepa', slightly east of a foot trail that goes from that cantón to the fincas. Well-
preserved buildings. Said to be the former home of people who now live in Zapaluta, Mexico (La
Trinitaria, Chiapas), who still come every year to give candles and take back salt water (everyone in
La Trinitaria drinks of it), as well as local flowers and candle stubs. They don't speak Chuj but
another language not Spanish [probably Tojolabal].