tzil, num cl (1a, A). Acts of ripping something apart. Ex: cha tzil, two ripping actions.
tzil (+N), num cl (2a, 030). Strips of N ripped off. Ex: cha tzil k'apak, two strips of cloth.
tzilanh (+N), num cl (2c, O30). Strips of N ripped off, or rips in something (not times
ripped or ripping actions). Ex: cha tzilanh k'apak, two strips of cloth ripped off somethng.
tzililih, stv. Easily ripped.
tzilchitej, vtr. To rip something up by grabbing it and pulling off pieces. Ex: stzilchitej, He
rips it up. stzilchitej winh, He rips it up.
tziltzil paj, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). A bird, 1-2" high, that makes a nest like a bag two feet long
hanging from a tree, with an entrance on one side. Common in San Mateo. The coloration is spotted
like ch'ilon or Black-and-white Warbler. Perhaps an Oropendula.
tzimah, n (te'). Plant name. < Mixe-Zoquean. Gourd Tree, Spanish "jícara." Crescentia cujete,
Calabash Tree. Or, the gourd made from the fruit of this tree. The tzimah gourd is a cup-like
vessel made from the oval fruit, cut with a wide mouth, used as a drinking vessel. Other vessels cut
from the tzimah are tul tzimah, "short tzimah," an ovaloid vessel with a small mouth used for
water storage (also called tzuh); jom, a shallow, wide-mouthed hemisphere used as a bowl; and
p'el jom, used to store tortillas.
tzimimih, vin. Spanish "sonora." To make the sound of a guitar being strummed, or a new
marimba being played. Ex: stzimimih, It sounds sonorous.
tzimin, n (nok'; mam, nun). Tapir, Spanish "danta." Tapirella bairdii (Jorge A. Ibarra, Mamíferos
de Guatemala, pp. 163-168).
tzin jap'ok, adj phrase. A little. Ex: 'ay tzin jap' ko munlajel, We have a little work.
tzinh, onom. The sound of small bells, money falling, a handful of keys jingling.
tzipa', vtr. To strew grains, e.g., wheat, corn, to chickens, in one spot, not a large area. (Contrast the
verb tzika', to strew grains across a field.) = tzipp'atih.
tzip, num cl(1a, A10c). Acts of tossing grain which scatters, as in feeding chickens. Ex: cha
tzip, two acts of tossing grains.
tzip (+N), num cl (1b, A10c). Hand-tosses of N, something that scatters as it is thrown,
e.g., grains, loose dirt, dust, but not a lump of clay. Ex: cha tzip 'ixim, two acts of tossing
corn grains.