tziyap, n (ch'anh). Spanish "tzuyacal." A woven palm-leaf raincape formerly used, now rare,
replaced by sheet plastic (nayleh). Ex: ch'anh tziyap, the raincape. stziyap, his raincape. stziyapil
nhap', the raincape ready for a rain.
tzoj-, vpo root. To be a large bundle or full bag.
tzojanh (+N), num cl (2c, 015b-1). Bundles about the size of a (Spanish) "costal," a
burlap bag, filled with N, grain, ore, rocks, etc. Ex: jun tzojanh plómah, one bundle of ore.
cha tzojanh polómah, two bags of ore. 'ix wil cha tzojanh 'ixim, I saw a couple of bundles
of corn.
tzojan tzojan, stv phrase. Insult to short people. Or, a short bundle of something, e.g., a
quintal (100 lbs) or less of corn standing in a bag.
tzoj kino'ox, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). A bird whose song sounds like a couple of gourd rattles
(tzojtzoj). Yellow with yellow stripes; similar to American Bittern (but not likely a Bittern). When
singing, the bird jumps from branch to branch. It is said that to begin dancing when this bird sings
will cause the body to become covered with boils. Found in the brush near San Mateo.
tzojo', vtr. To shake a gourd rattle.
tzoj (+N), num cl (1a, 1b; A23). Times shaking N, a gourd rattle. Ex: cha tzoj, two acts of
shaking a gourd rattle. cha tzoj tzojtzoj, two times shaking a gourd rattle.
tzoj (+N), num cl (3a, 3b; A23). Noises made by shaking N, a gourd rattle. Ex: cha tzoj,
two noises of a gourd rattle being shaken. cha tzoj tzojtzoj, two noises made by shaking a
gourd rattle.
tzojojih, vin. To cough a lot. Ex: stzojojih, He coughs a lot.
tzojop'tanhej, vtr. To make noise with a gourd rattle.
tzojtzoj, n ('anh). Plant name. A hot country vine resembling k'ok' (Spanish "chilacayote,"
Cucurbita ficifolia) that yields gourds with an ovaloid body and a long, narrow shaft-like handle as
their natural shape. The seeds dry inside to form a gourd rattle, with no cleaning necessary. The
gourd is called ('anh) tzojtzoj (Spanish "chinchin"), like the plant. The gourd is also opened at the
end of the shaft, capped, and used on trips as a container for ground coffee. Lagenaria siceraria,
Bottle Gourd. NB: A tzimah gourd, a tree gourd, with an attached handle, used as a rattle, is also
called (te') tzojtzoj. See also tzimah and tzuh.