tzop-, vpo root. To be puckered, wrinkled.
tzopan tzopan, stv phrase. Puckered, wrinkled, as a toothless mouth or a rotting avocado.
tzopu ti', n phrase. Toothless (causing a puckered mouth), having a puckered mouth.
(Insult)
tzop', n ('ixim). Corn silk. Ex: stzop', his corn silk. stzop'al 'ixim, the silk of the corn.
tzoyol, n ('anh). Plant name. Guatemalan Spanish "huisquil, güisquil," Mexican Spanish "chayote."
An edible squash, Sechium edule. Chayote.
tzuh, n ('anh). Plant name. Bottle gourd. Spanish "tecomate." Lagenaria siceraria. The gourd
plant, fruit, or prepared vessel. The classic tzuh vessel is hour-glass shaped, with an opening at the
top, used for carrying water to the fields. See also tul tzimah, tzimah, jom, p'el jom, tzojtzoj.
The name tzuh can also be applied to a tree gourd, from the tzimah tree (Crescentia cujete); in this
case the noun classifier is te', not 'anh. If the tzuh gourd is cut at its waist, it leaves two narrow-
mouthed vessels that are used to store tortillas, the p'el jom, which may be as much as two feet in
diameter. The vessel jom, a shallow, wide-mouthed vessel used as a bowl, is usually cut from the
tzuh gourd, especially if it has an unuseable top part, but it may be cut from a tzimah.
tzuh (+N), num cl (4, 01b). A gourd canteen (tzuh) full of N, a liquid or grain, especially
beans. Ex: jun tzu 'uk'em, a gourdfull of (Spanish) "bebida, posol de nixtamal." cha tzu tut,
two gourdsful of beans.
tzuh, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). A large (2-3" long) green grasshopper, shaped like a folded leaf, with a
song like a katydid, a long, sustained, high-pitched whirr. Their presence in or near a house is a bad
omen, signifying death.
tzuku', vtr. To pull hair, pluck chickens, pick cotton, or weed around plants. Ex: tzin tzuku', I jerk
on something.
tzuk (+N), num cl (1a, 1b; A14b). Pulls or tugs on N, hair, chicken feathers, weeds, etc.
Ex: cha tzuk, two tugs. jun tzuk xil jolom, one tug on head hair. cha tzuk kaxlanh, two
chicken-plucking actions. 'ox tzuk 'anhk'ultak, three pulls on weeds.
tzuk'anh, num cl. Groups of animate beings clustered together, as soldiers standing in formation,
or people walking in parade, or as sheep in a tight flock. Ex: cha tzukanh 'animah, two bunches of
people.