385
mong some animals (there are the crests of animals).
woton, n (nok'). Men's speech: Button. Cf. p'oton, women's speech. < Spanish "botón." Ex:
swoton, his button. swotonal swex, the buttons on his pants.
wotonh, n (winh). Day name: "hora" in the pagan system of divination by day names.
Corresponds to Akbal in the Yucatecan system of day names. NB: This name is surely related to
the day name Uotan and the deity Votan attested in Chiapas and elsewhere. The etymology of
the name Votan has long been a mystery. I believe the answer is found in terms from Nahua
languages. Karttunen's dictionary of Central Mexican Nahuatl (1983:64) reports the term
cuauhtlah /kwaw-tlah/ "mountain, wilderness, forest / montaña, arboleda o bosque," from the
entry quauhtla in Molina's 1571 vocabulary. This is a locative noun based on cuahuitl, (kwawitl)
'tree', literally 'forest, where trees abound' (Sullivan 1976:156). A cognate term in a Salvadoran
variety of Nahuat is cuhtan /kuh-tan/ "monte, campo" (Rivas 1961). From these two forms I
postulate a Gulf Coast Nahuat term *kwohtan, intermediate between the Central Mexican term
and the Salvadoran one. It is reasonable to imagine *kwohtan (or a similar form) being loaned
into Mayan as /wotan/, i.e., Votan. The final velar nasal attested in Chuj is consistent with Gulf
Nahua phonologies. My hypothesis is that this name refers to the Earth Lord, who goes by many
names, including Chuj Wtz-'Ak'lik "Mountain-Grasslands" (i.e., Earth); Kekchí Cu:l Taq'a
"Mountain-Valley" (also Earth), and Chol Yum Witz "Mountain Lord," among others. The
association with Akbal "night" derives from the identification of the Earth Lord with the
Underworld; The underworld Earth Lord complements the celestial Sun, "day," as principal
deities.
wot'o', vtr. To wad things up. Cf. wotz', below.
wot' (+N), num cl (1b, A). Acts of tossing something (N) that lands in a wad. Ex: jun
wot' k'apak, one toss of cloth that lands in a wad. cha wot', two tosses of something.
wot'anh (+N), num cl (2c, 014b). Things drawn up into themselves, wadded up and
thrown down, e.g., a piece of cloth wadded up and thrown down, a worm drawn up into a
wad. Ex: jun wot'anh k'apak, one ball of wadded cloth. cha wit'anh lukum, two drawn-up
worms.
wot'an wot'an, stv phrase. = wotz'an wotz'an. To pull the limbs in under the body, e.g.,
a cat preparing to spring, or just waiting, or a snake that draws back from something.
wot'chimtak, stv. Something that is all creased and wrinkled, like a piece of paper that
has been wadded up and then smoothed out.