391
xalach, exclam. And you? < *xal hach.
xalmah, n. A kind of cargo frame for mules that consists of a pair of square leather bags packed
with straw or grass, joined by a leather band with a loop for a tail strap. Possibly < Spanish, but
origin unknown; cf. xala'.
xalu nheh, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). Literally, Split Tail. A bird with a split tail, identified from
pictures as an Arctic Tern (unlikely). Or, a kind of butterfly, about 1" long, either green or black,
having a split tail. Ex: xalu nhe winh, his bird. xalu nhehal nok', the bird among the animals.
xaluh, n (lum). < Spanish "jarra." A jug used to measure the salt water left over when an
undersized ch'up' is used to carry salt water from the mines. Not a standard measure, but
depends on what jug is handy. Ex: jun xaluh, one jugfull. chap' xaluh, two jugs. 'oxe xaluh, three
jugsfull.
xaluh (+N), num cl (4, 01b). Cups of liquid; any cup, not a standard measure. Ex: jun
xaluh, a cupfull. cha xalu 'atz'am, two cups of salt water.
xam-, vpo root. To have a nicked edge.
xaman xaman, stv phrase. An edge with nicks in it, e.g., a nicked machete blade, a table
edge with a piece out of it, a piece of paper with a piece torn out of one edge (not the
cf. xepan xepan).
corner,
xamu ti', n phrase. A person with a visible tooth missing.
xan, n (lum). Adobe. Ex: xan pat, an adobe house. 'ol ko p'o jun ko xan pat = 'ol ko p'o jun ko
pat xan, We're going to make an adobe house. xan winh, his adobe. xanil pat, adobe for a house.
xan, n ('anh). Plant name. A palm tree with palmate (hand-shaped) leaves on stems coming out
of the top of the trunk. Cf. koyol, kókah, pojoj, other palms. Brahea prominens.
xan malin, n (winh). A famous sorceror from Yolaquitac (see The Sorceror, a Chuj text in the
Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America, www.AILLA.utexas.org).
xan palas, n (lum). Place name: San Francisco, Chiapas, Mexico.
xanta mályah, n ('anh). Plant name. < Spanish "Santa María." H 0012, Br 8474, 8501, 11530.
Orthosanthus chimborascensis var. centroamericanus. See also kotak xanta mályah.
xantex, n (winh). Surname: Santizo.
xanh, adj. Difficult. Ex: te xanh munlajel, very difficult work. te xanh, That's very difficult.