viii
(lum), water (ha'), or stone (k'en), depending on their nature.
interr n Interrogative Noun. Several nouns are so marked, including words for the
questions "Where?," "How?," "When," etc.
loc n
Locative nouns form a small set of items that indicate relative locations, e.g.,
'above', 'below'. As in other Mayan languages and Mesoamerican languages in general, some of
these are taken from body part nomenclature, and are inflected for possession to indicate the
reference point: yip'anh 'above (it)', kip'anh 'above us', from 'ip' 'lower abdomen' (presumably
referring to the upper body as opposed to the legs). Others have no such origin: yalanh 'below it',
kalanh 'below us'. Similar locational terms that require the use of t'a 'at', are not marked as loc n,
e.g., tz'ey, next to, t'a stz'ey, next to it; t'a patik, behind (< pat, [one's] back).
n phrase Noun phrase. Some nominal lexical items consist of more than one word, and
these are listed as "n phrase."
Numerals and Numericals
num
Numbers are technically a kind of noun (they can, for instance, be possessed to
form ordinals), and numerical phrases are for the most part noun phrases. However, since they
constitute a domain of special interest they receive extended treatment. In contrast to many
modern Mayan languages, the Chuj number lexicon is still in use even for the higher numbers,
and many derivative expressions are known. Entries for numbers include num stem, numerical
stem, a combination of morphemes that may be further derived or inflected, and num phrase,
numerical phrase, constructions involving more than one lexical item.
num cl
Numeral classifiers receive special attention. Two kinds of information are given
when recorded. Since the numeral classifiers are generally recruited from other form classes, the
grammatical derivation of the numeral classifier is noted. For instance, items marked (4) are
taken from nouns, usually measures or containers. These categories also relate to whether the
num cl derived from a verb counts actions (1) or the results of actions (2), and if a following
noun can be given, whether this noun represents the object of the action or its instrument (a, b,
etc.).
The second notation indicates whether it is actions counted (A) or objects (O), and there
follows a notation that relates to the semantics of the item. Unfortunately, while the notations
were preserved in the slip files, the guide to the classification has been lost in the intervening half
century. The interested reader will have to reconstruct the classes by organizing the data.
Whatever the classes, they were established by sorting tasks with the informant, and should