ix
represent some sort of cognitive classes. Mea culpa.
The most frequent origins of num cl are vtr (actions and the results of actions), vpo
(shapes, consistencies, aggregations, etc.), and n (measures).
A detailed description of the domain of numeral classifiers can be found in Hopkins
(1970). This paper is the only published result of a collaboration with Brent Berlin (Tzeltal) and
Chris Day (Jacaltec) in which we planned to write an integrated study of the grammar (Hopkins),
lexicon (Day) and semantics (Berlin) of the domain. The grammar is described in the cited
article. The lexicon of Chuj, at least, is recorded here, and Tzeltal lexicon and the semantics of
Tzeltal numeral classifiers, similar to the semantics of the other two systems, were adequately
covered by Berlin in his doctoral dissertation, Berlin (1964), and in Berlin (1968). One
conclusion that can be drawn from the comparison of these systems is that while the grammars
and the semantics are quite similar, the lexicon is not, in general, cognate across the three
languages. This implies a common semantic patrimony and diffusion of the grammatical system,
each language independently assigning lexicon to the task. (A similar situation is presented by
the noun classifiers, see Hopkins (2012, In press).
Verbs and Verbal Forms
Three major verb classes are distinguished by derivational and inflectional morphology.
A fourth class has only one member. Transitive and intransitive verb roots may serve directly as
verb stems (and take inflection for tense/aspect, etc.) without derivation. Positional verb roots do
not occur without derivation, and the resulting forms may have various statuses, inflecting as
statives or as verbs. (In my dissertation I treated these as a non-verbal root class.) Note that the
status suffixes occur only phrase-final (i.e., they do not occur if anything follows in the verbal
phrase, such as a subject or object). The existential verb, 'ay 'to be' takes no tense/aspect marking
and is inflected for subject like a non-verbal predicate (i.e., with Set B suffixes): 'ajtil 'ay-ach,
Where are you (from)?
vtr, vin, vpo, vex The first two classes of verbs are marked as vtr (transitive) and vin
(intransitive) and cited with the status suffixes (on the surface, -a', -o', -u', transitive, and -ih,
intransitive). Positional verbs are cited in root form and marked as vpo root. In the sample
phrases and sentences, vtr and vin are usually inflected for tense/aspect and person (subject
and/or object).
Tense/aspect preclitics are 'ix, past; tz- (> s- before consonants), present; 'ol, future.
Subjects and objects: As subjects/agents of transitive verbs (and possessors of nouns), before
consonants other than glottal stop, the person markers (generally known as Set A pronouns; see