X
Hopkins 1968) are hin, I; ha, you; s, he/she/it/they; ko, we; he, y'all. Stems beginning in glottal
stop lose the glottal stop and take the prefixes w-, I; h-, you; y-, he/she/it/they; k- we; hey-, y'all
(or, as possessives, my, your, his, etc.).
As preclitic subjects of intransitive verb stems and objects of transitives, subject/patient
pers markers (generally known as Set B pronouns) are hin, I; hach, you; ø, he'she/it/they;
honh, we, hex, y'all. Stems beginning in glottal stop take the same prefixes, e.g., tzin 'achanwih,
I'm bathing < tz-hin 'achanwih. (See below for Set B suffixes on stative stems.)
stv or stv phrases, many of which are derived from vpo, are inflected as non-verbal
predicates, i.e., they do not take tense/aspect markers and are inflected for subject with suffixed
(Set B) person markers. The Set B suffixes are in, I; ach, you; ø, he/she/it/they; onh, we; ex, y'all.
Ex: kolan-in, I'm unoccupied.
vex, the existential verb 'ay, appears to be similar to stv on the surface, but has a distinct
underlying structure: e.g., 'ayin che'ej, 'I have grinding to do' < 'ay hin-che'ej 'there exists my
grinding'.
Note that statives are often difficult to gloss in English. Consequently they are often
characterized by a list of appropriate uses rather than an attempted translation.
vtr pas or vin (vtr pas) Passive forms of transitive verbs are of course inflected like
intransitive verbs (for subject only, no expressed object). In a recent study, Buenrostro (2000;
orthography regularized here) argues that ch-aj-ih (which she takes to be -chaj-ih) is the most
common passive derivation, and that both agent and patient may be stated in following noun
phrases: 'ix-o-say-chaj nok' chi'ich 'fue buscado el conejo'. (The rabbit was sought.) niw-an 'ixim
wa'-il tz-o-mol-ch-aj-ih 'muchas tortillas se juntaron'. (Many tortillas were gathered.) Likewise,
aj-ih passives have an "impersonal reading," expression of the agent is optional, and the patient
may be focussed in a preverbal Topic position: 'ix-hin-ø-'elk'-aj-ih 'me robaron', (I was robbed.)
ha nok' k'ultakil chej ø-'il-ji-nak 'el-tah 'el venado fue visto'. (The deer was sighted.) She also
notes that passives in -j-ih cannot take an expressed agent: tz-o-choj-j-ih 'se muele el maíz'. (The
corn is ground.) Finally, n-aj-ih passives may take expressed patients that are high in the
hierarchy of animacy (e.g., people): lan y-ik'-n-aj p'at winh chi' 'lo están llevando'. (They are
carrying him [but literally, 'That man is being carried'.]) y-uj chi', ma-j-ø-cha'-n-aj winh y-uj hep'
winh chonhap' tík 'por eso, no fue recibido por la gente del pueblo'. (So, he was not received by
the people of the village.) Caveat lector: Not all these forms of passive are so marked in this
dictionary; many are marked as vin, since they inflect as intransitives.
vtr-dir and vin-dir Transitive and intransitive verb stems may be derived and/or inflected for