103
knowledge. 'ay sjolomal hu'um, He knows paperwork.
jolom(al), n. A little bit given free because of a purchase in quantity; lagniappe,
something to boot, pilón. Ex: sjolom(al), his lagniappe.
jolom pajatz', n ('anh). Plant name: Pineapple, Spanish "piña." The pineapple fruit or
plant. The source for San Mateo is in Barillas, one or two leagues below the cabecera of
Barillas. The cost is 1-2 centavos (Quetzal) each. Ex: sjolom pajatz', his pineapple.
sjolom pajatz'il, the pineapples planted among other plants.
jolom penek, n. Knee. Ex: jolom spenek, his knee. jolom spenekal wakax, the knee of a
COW.
the
jolom -p'ih, n phrase. Full name (of a person); three parts, the first (personal) name,
surname (family name), and the father's first name, e.g, Francisco Santizo Andrés,
Francisco Santizo, son of Andrés. Cf. p'ih. Ex: jolom sp'ih, his full name. sjolom hin p'ih,
my full name. tas sjolom ha p'ih, What is your full name? tas sjolom sp'ih ha mam, What
is your father's full name? sjolom sp'ihal ha mam, your father's full name.
jolom, n. Peak. An element in place names; the peak of a mountain or hill, a place located near a
peak.
jolom k'akap, n (lum). Place name: Literally, Head of the Barranca. Ruins in Nentón that
are a meeting place for the chiápah. In the neighborhood of Colonia Tziscao and El
Quetzal (Mexico), but inside Guatemala, southeast of Tziscao towards Uxquén. See also
hokanhalep'.
jolom k'e'en, n (lum). Place name: ruins in the village of San Mateo Ixtatán. Or, ha'
jolom k'e'en, an arroyo forming part of the Río Pajelná, San Mateo. Literally, Head of
the Rock.
jolom k'isis, n (lum). Place name: Literally, Cypress Peak. Jolomquisís, a caserío of
Patalcal, San Mateo.
jolom tenam, n (lum). Place name: Literally, Head of the Rock Outcrop. Jolomtenam,
one of the five major aldeas of San Mateo. [See the map in Field Notes, August 31-
September 6, 1964]
jolom tenam pak'uma'al, n (lum). Place name: Literally, Pacumal Rock Outcrop Peak.
Peñasco Pacumal, San Mateo.