104
jolom tenam jukup', n (lum). Place name: Jolomtenam Segundo, San Sebastián Coatán.
Literally, Trough Boulder Peak.
jolom witz nhajap'tak, n (lum). Place name: Arroyo La Meona, San Mateo. Literally,
Abundance of Lakes Mountain Peak.
jol witz kulus, n (lum). Place name: Cerro Jolhuitzculuz, San Sebastián Coatán.
Literally, Cross Mountain Peak (in Chuj of San Sebastián).
joljowes, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). A bird unknown to the informant except for its song, jol jo
wes, two flat notes and a rising note; sung on clear nights.
jom, n (te'). Spanish "guacal." A hemispherical gourd vessel cut from the round fruit of the
tzimah tree ("jícara," Crescentia cujete), or from a tzuh ("tecomate") gourd (Lagenaria
siceraria) that has a bad top part (unusable as a water vessel, but leaving the useful bottom
bowl). Used to drink atole or chilacayote (squash) stew. Cf. tzimah, tzuh, tul tzimah, p'el jom.
Ex: sjom, his gourd bowl. sjomal 'ulul, the gourd bowl for atole.
jom lu'um, n (lum). A clay bowl shaped like the gourd jom, but usually much bigger,
used to keep things in. Ex: sjom lu'um, his bowl. sjom lumal smixin, the bowl for his
morning washing.
jonhkin, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). Spanish "rana." Small (2" high) land frogs usually found in milpas,
fields. Yellowish with smooth skin. Not eaten. Cf. pajtza', k'ok'on, peke'.
jopo', vtr. To pick up a handful of grain, palm down.
jop (+N), num cl (1b, A5a). Acts of grabbing up a handful of grains with a lateral sweep
of the hand. Ex: cha jop 'ixim, two acts of grabbing a handful of maize grains.
jopanh, num cl (2c, 015a) Handsful of grain, held palm down. Ex: cha jopanh 'ixim, two
handsful of maize grains.
jopuljup' 'ek'ih, vin phrase. To walk in a dangerous spot, e.g., one where there has been a
landslide or where a landslide looks imminent; to walk with much care. Ex: jopuljup' yek'ih, He
walks carefully.
jor, onom. A horse's snort, as when startled at night. *sjor.
jornajih, vin. To snort, as a horse startled at night. Ex: sjornajih, He snorts.
jorjoran -nhi', vin phrase. To snore. = k'anh -nhi'. Ex: sjorjoran snhi', He snores.