xi
directional motion. The suffixes involved are drawn from the free intransitive verbs of
directional motion. 'go', 'come', etc., and are placed in two adjacent suffix positions
The position closest to the verb modifies the manner of the action. This set includes the
following, recruited from the set of intransitive verbs of directional motion but in several
instances altered in phonological shape from the original: -ek' 'around', -em 'down', -el 'out', -uch
'in', -kan 'stable', -kut 'nearing', -p'at 'leaving', -k'e' 'rising', -k'och 'arriving', and -hul 'coming'. Ex:
nitz-ek'-ih 'to move something to the side'. nitz-uch-ih 'to move something flush against
something else'. nitz-kut-ih 'to move something towards a goal'.
The second position reports the direction or location of movement in carrying out the
action of the verb. This set includes the verbs in their normal shapes: 'ek' 'to pass by', 'em 'to go
down', 'el 'to leave', 'och 'to enter', kan 'to stay', kut 'to draw near', p'at 'to go (away)', k'e' 'to rise',
koch 'to arrive', and hul 'to come'. Ex: way-kan 'em-ih 'to stay sleeping down somewhere'. payej
'el-ih 'to extract something by heating (to heat something out)'. 'awan 'och-ih 'to plant something
inside (holes)'. kuchan kot-ih 'to carry something towards a goal'.
A position further from the verb may contain a suffix that expresses that the action is
carried out towards the speaker: -tah 'towards the speaker' (versus the normal ih if the movement
is away from the speaker). Ex: 'ik'-k'e'-tah 'to transport something upwards towards the speaker'
(vs. 'ik'-k'e'-ih, to do so away from the speaker).
vin [phrase] (vtr + incorporated object) This lengthy marking accompanies verbal
constructions that are in effect a kind of antipassive. The transitive verb is suffixed w-ih and the
nominal object of the verbal action is stated, but in an inert form, i.e., it cannot be inflected (for
possession, number, etc.). It is incorporated into the verb word. The construction is inflected for
subject as an intransitive verb phrase. Phonologically, the incorporated noun is unstressed, a
phonetic clue that has been missed by some observers. Ex: stukwi ch'al winh, He pull apart
fibers, or He fiber-pulls, where the noun ch'al 'fiber' is unstressed: [stúk.wi.ch'al.wính.] < tz-ø-
tuk-w-ih ch'al winh.
vin phrase This marking is used for verbal expressions that include more than one lexical
item. Inflection on these constructions is on the intransitive verb stem. NB: When the
constructions involve a directional verb, there may be some confusion of this category with stv
phrase, where the inflection is on the stative stem, since the two constructions are nearly
identical in their surface forms. Only in non-third person inflections is there a clear contrast, and
most elicitation recorded only third-person forms. In the case of CVC-an forms accompanied by
directional notation, there are two possibilities: (1) the construction could be a stative phrase,