xii
inflected on the stative form with Set B suffixes, or (2) it could be an intransitive verb phrase,
inflected on the directional verb with Set A prefixes. In the case of 'ajtil pakanach 'ek'ih, Where
have you been?, the inflection pakan-ach marks the phrase as stative. The case of t'esan hin 'elih,
I'm inflated, is ambiguous, either t'esan-in 'elih (stv phrase) or tesan hin-'elih (vin phrase). The
case of ch'ekan sk'e'ih, He's sitting up (alone, of all of us), is unambiguously vin phrase, ch'ekan
tz-o-k'e'ih.
vin-rep
Some verbs suffixed with the repetitive suffix x are marked as vin-rep if the
derivation is not apparent on the surface. Ex: jaxih, to come again (return), <jah-x-ih. 'otchih to
enter again, < 'och-x-ih.
vtr Root transitive verb stems (i.e., CVC underived vtr roots) take the status suffixes 'Vh
(after CV') and -hV' (elsewhere). The vowel V is a after i, e, a in the CVC root, o after o, and u
after u. Regular morphophonemic changes reduce the consonant clusters C-h and '-C-. If an
expressed subject or object (or any other sentence component) follows, the suffix is omitted. Ex:
pi'ah < pi'-'ah, to take the kinks out of something. piha' < pih-ha', to stretch something. tz'u'uh <
tz'u'-'uh, to chew sugar cane. p'olo' < p'ol-ho', to roast something. tiwa' < tip'-ha', to carry
something cylindrical. tzin smak'a' < tz-hin-s-mak'-ha', He hits me; tzin smák' wính, The man
hits me. Derived transitive verb stems, mostly suffixed -ej (or -C-ej, C-it-ej, etc.), do not take
status suffixes.
vtr implied but not attested
Transitive verb roots so marked have not been attested in
the shape CVC + status suffix, i.e., CVC-V' or CV'-Vh. However, the lexical items listed below
such an entry are sufficient to posit a transitive verb of the shape given. Ex: hapa', vtr, to open
holes in something, is implied by the passive form hapchajih, vtr pas, for holes to be opened in
something. kip'a', vtr, to toss liquid, is implied by kip'elih, vtr-dir, to toss a liquid away.
vtr phrase Transitive verb phrases have more than one lexical item and the main verb is
inflected with Set A prefixes. A large number of such phrases are built on the auxiliary verb 'ak'
(or 'ak'an) 'to do' and have as their other element an incorporated Spanish-origin verb, e.g., 'ak'
pensar 'to think' (< Spanish "pensar"); 'ak'an konsegir 'to obtain something' (< Spanish
"conseguir". Since this is a productive mechanism for incorporating Spanish verbs, there are
many more phrases in the language that are not included in this dictionary.
Other vtr phrases are verb plus object, forming an idiomatic phrase, e.g., 'awan kulus 'to
plant a cross'; 'ik' 'ip 'to rest' (literally 'to take strength'), k'anh nhi' 'to snore' (literally, 'to sound
the nose'); musej sat 'to trick someone' (literally, 'to cover the eyes'). Reflexive transitives are
also marked as vtr phrase: jup' -p'ah 'to thrash oneself (in a sweatbath)'. Other vtr phrases simply