xiii
incorporate adverbials of various sorts.
vtr (part)
distinguish
Some instances of the participles of transitive verbs are so marked, usually to
them from the similar forms of positional verbs.
vpo root
Positional verb roots are not found in underived forms, so they are listed as CVC-,
vpo root. The following entries give the forms on which this root is proposed. Positionals
undergo a number of derivational processes (mostly reduplication) that occur with no other form
class. Many positional roots are homorganic with transitive verb roots and have similar
meanings, but there are also positional roots that have meanings distinct from those of
homorganic transitive verbs, and positionals that have no transitive counterpart.
Semantically, positional roots deal with the specification of shapes, aggregations, and
other physical features of objects. Two kinds of positionals can be distinguished (but are not
marked here): distributive positionals describe features distributed across a number of objects;
non-distributive positionals describe features concentrated on a single object. The contrast
between these two types can be seen in the derived numeral classifiers, as in the following: cha'
pilanh lu'um 'two ball-shaped pieces of clay' (distributive); cha' potz'anh lu'um 'two dents in a
clay object' (non-distributive).
A notable set of noun phrases built on positional roots and consisting of CVC-u body
part constitute insults and rude comments with respect to people (or animals) that have
prominent features, e.g., kechu nhi' 'Flat nose!' If the features noted are plural, the construction is
CVC-jap' body part, e.g., kech jap' 'ok 'Flat feet!'
Minor classes
adj
Adjectives generally share with nouns inflection for person but not tense/aspect,
but they have a unique derivation in p'-ih to form intransitive verb stems. A large subset of
adjectives, those which describe colors, occur with unique derivational suffixes (probably
positional verbs in origin) to form stems that describe color variants.
adj implied but not attested (in isolation) Like the similar marking for vtr implied, this
marking notes that the adjective was not attested in underived form. Most if not all the instances
are based on forms with -p'-ih suffixes. Others are based on semantics; some derivations overlap
with vpo, so some of these adj identifications may be in error.
adv
A few lexical monomorphemic items are classed as adverbs. The great majority
of these adverbs are loans from Spanish; native adverb roots probably number fewer than a
dozen. Other adverbs are derived, usually employing the suffix ok, from verbal constructions,