133
or fungus that grows into a 1"-diameter ball, white when young but turning black; when
squeezed, they puff out a cloud of black spores. Ex: skos, his puffball. *skos(il/al). Note that
fungi are classified as "animal" (nok'), because the edible ones are eaten like meat is eaten. Cf.
kokon.
kos, adj implied but not attested. Soft and good to eat.
kososih -lojih, vin. To be soft and good to eat, like a meaty fruit, e.g., güisquil (chayote),
potato, apple; not something watery like an orange, but (Spanish) "suave para comer."
Ex: kososi slojih, It's good eating!
kosp'ih, vin. To become soft and good to eat (kososih).
kos-, vpo root. To be crawling around.
kosan kosan, stv phrase. Like fat puppies crawling around blindly.
koskon 'ek'tah, vin phrase. To be crawling along a wall horizontally, neither up nor
down. = kososih 'ek'tah.
kososih, stv. Crawling. Ex: kososi -p'atih, to crawl straight ahead. kososi -emih, to crawl
down (below the speaker). kososi -emtah, to be crawling down (above the speaker and
moving towards him). kososi -k'e'ih, to be crawling up (above and away from the
speaker). kososi -k'etah, to be crawling up (below and moving towards the speaker).
kososi -ochi, to be crawling into a house (away from the speaker). kososi -ochtah, to be
crawling in (towards the speaker). kososih -ek'ih, to be crawling around, wandering, e.g.,
young puppies, ants, fat infants, caterpillars. kososih 'ek'tah, To be crawling along a wall
horizontally, neither up nor down. = koskon 'ek'tah.
kóstah, n (lum). < Spanish "costa." The Pacific Coast finca region, known as (Spanish) "la costa
grande." The hot country south of the Sierra Madre.
kostil, n (nok'). Ribs, Spanish "costilla." One of the pieces into which an animal cut when
butchered. Cf. k'echmitej. Ex: skostil, his ribs (in his body, or the ones he has bought). nok'
kostilal, the ribs among the pieces of meat.
kostúmrah, n. Pagan ritual. < Spanish "costumbre." Prayers, candle- and copal-burning, outside
the strictly Catholic ritual approved by the priest. Ex: skostúmrah, his costumbre (that he
performs). skostúmrahil, its costumbre, ritual done for a purpose.
kot-, vpo root. To be standing on four legs.