162
k'oj yem tut, n ('anh). Plant name. Spanish "frijol de mata," a class of beans that grow
into a small bush, neither climbing nor spreading out across the ground. Includes k'ik'
k'oj yem tut = 'omon tut, chak k'oj yem tut = chak k'ox tut, k'un patik.
k'ojan, stv. Sitting, as in a chair. = wokan. Ex: 'eman k'ojan, Sit down!
k'ojan ko chi'ich, stv sentence. Full moon; the moon is shining all night, from dusk till
dawn. Literally, Our Aunt (the Moon) is seated. Cf. k'ojnajih chi'ich.
k'ojan k'olal, stv. Slowly. = k'ojanhk'olal in rapid speech.
k'ojanh (+N), num cl (2c, 024a). Tall stacks of firewood, wheat bundles, or corn ears
tied in pairs and stacked pair on top of pair, the bottom pair across a horizontal pole. Ex:
cha k'ojanh k'atzitz, two stacks of firewood.
k'ojnajih chi'ich, vin phrase. For the Moon to shine all night. Cf. k'ojan ko chi'ich. Ex:
'ix k'ojnaj chi'ich, there was moonlight all night; Our Aunt the Moon was seated.
k'ojnup', n. A place to set something down, e.g., in the past, racks outside the salt mines
on which to set full pots of salt water. Also, a bench.
k'ojnup'al, n. Resting places. A measure of distance in traveling: How many times does
a loaded man stop to rest? About once every kilometer. Flexible, as the stops are more
frequent in rugged terrain. Ex: jun k'ojnup'al, one stop. cha k'ojnup'al, two stops. 'oxe
k'ojnup'al, three stops.
k'oj, n (te'). A mask, Spanish "máscara." A wooden mask used by dancers in the Carnaval and
Concepción festivals. Cf. lap'alwum. These are often old masks that have been kept for years;
now also some paper masks. Ex: sk'oj, his mask. sk'ojal chanhal, the mask for a dance.
k'oj yem tut, n ('anh). Plant name. Spanish "frijol de mata," a class of beans that grow into a
small bush, neither climbing nor spreading out across the ground. Includes k'ik' k'oj yem tut =
'omon tut, chak k'oj yem tut = chak k'ox tut, k'un patik.
k'ojo', vtr. To begin a task of embroidery or weaving for someone who doesn't know how to
start, i.e., to make the first line of weaving or embroidery.
k'ojan 'el yich, vtr phrase. To begin to do a piece of work, e.g., the first steps in weaving,
or to harvest the first day's work in a field. Cf. k'ojel yich. Ex: tzin k'ojan 'el yich, I'm
beginning it.
k'ojel yich, vtr-dir phrase. To begin to do a piece of work, e.g., the first steps in weaving