183
the out-stretched index finger (hand held as if imitating pointing a gun). Ex: jun lochwel, one
fingerspan. cha lochwel = chap' lochwel, two fingerspans. 'ox lochwel = 'oxe lochwel, three
fingerspans.
loch', n. The act of sexual intercourse. Cf. 'istzilwel. Ex: 'ix wil jun loch' t'a chi', I saw
intercourse over there; I ran across some people having intercourse.
loch'ej, vtr. To have sexual intercourse. Cf. 'istzilej. Ex: tza loch'ej, You have sexual
intercourse.
lojo', vtr. To peck food with the beak, e.g., a chicken or other bird. = t'ojo'.
loj, num cl (1b, A16a). = t'oj. Acts of pecking with the beak (chickens).
lojojih, stv. Limp, e.g., a hot candle that won't stand, but bends over; a limp, useless hand; a
drunk passed out; an uncooked tortilla (cf. lo'oj).
loko', vtr. To handle things tied in pairs, e.g., to hang up and take down corn ears tied in pairs for
hanging across a pole.
lokan, vtr(part). Hung up; or, participating in some affair or the affairs of a group. Ex:
k'e' lokan, to hang something up.
lokanh (+N), num cl (2c, O). Pairs of objects tied together for hanging over a single
support, e.g., pairs of ears of corn that are tied for hanging over a pole, or pairs of rope
bundles tied for hanging over a nail. Ex: cha lokanh nhal, two pairs of corn ears tied for
hanging. jun lokanh ch'anh, a pair of bundles of rope tied together for hanging.
lokemtah, vtr-dir. To take down something hanging on a nail, rope, or hanger.
lokp'ej, vtr. To hang something up on a nail, rope, or lokte' hanger.
lokte', n (te'). A hanger made from the trunk of a small tree (e.g., pine) that has several
branches coming out at one place; dangled (like a fishhook) from a house beam on a rope
and used for hanging ropes, hats, etc. Ex: slokte', his hanger. slokte'al k'apak, a hanger for
clothes.
lókoh, n (winh, 'ix). < Spanish "loco." A person who has dizzy spells or attacks (described as
like epileptic seizures). Or, a very mean or angry person.
lok'o', vtr. To turn over a sheet of something, e.g., a tortilla on the griddle, a page in a book; or
to lift a book's end up to look under it. Also, to rip off (not cut) ears of maize.