184
lok' p'ak'ech, n (te'). Plant name. Br 8550, 11480. Xanthoxylum foliolosum.
lol, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). A kind of cricket, black, 1/2" long, that sings in spaced pulses, then
pauses as long as the songs. Contrast chil, whose song is sustained.
lolis, n. Vagina. = tux. Ex: slolis, her vagina. lolisal, by vagina, i.e., payment by sex. *slolisal.
See also yol lolis.
lolonel, n. A talk or chat.
lómah, n (nok'). < Spanish "lomo," a cut of meat, loin. Ex: slómah, his cut of meat. slómahil
nok', the animal's loin.
lonh-, vpo root. To be drooping, hanging down loosely.
lonh, n. A rounded protrusion under a chicken's neck; or, the sheet of skin that hangs
beneath a cow's neck. Ex: slonh nok', the animal's neck protrusion. *slonhil/slonhal.
lonhan, adv. Drooping. Ex: lonhan 'emih, to droop down, like a drooping rope, or a road
that curves downhill. lonhan k'e'ih, to curve uphill, like a road.
lonhan lonhan, stv phrase. Curved, e.g., a rope not stretched tight, a road that curves
around something (not a house roof that sags).
lonho', vtr. To drink a liquid.
lonh (+N), num cl (1b, A16b-1). Acts of drinking a liquid. Ex: cha lonh ha', two acts of
drinking water.
lonhanh (+N), num cl (2c, O). Drinks of liquid, i.e., the liquid drunk. Ex: cha lonhanh
ha', two drinks of water (two mouthfuls of water drunk).
lopil, n (nok'). Spanish "capixay" (from Basque kapusai,"parket, jacket with hood," in turn from
Latin cappa sayo, "vulture cape"). A black woven woolen jacket worn by men in San Mateo and
in all Chuj and Kanjobal towns as well as many Tzeltal and Tzotzil towns in Chiapas, where
such jackets are known as chuj. The basic material is a heavy wool rectangle about 2x6 feet,
large enough to be folded in two to form a poncho with a hole cut for the head. Material for the
quasi-sleeves is cut off from the bottom of the front panel; currently (1960s), the sleeves are
vestigial, constituting only a cover for the shoulders and upper arms, open tubes too narrow for
the arm to pass through. Previous generations wore the capixay with full sleeves. Machine sewn
embroidery decorates the front bottom, sleeve cuffs, and neck hole; the traditional design for the
latter resembles a necklace and pectoral cross. The capixay is open on the sides under the sleeves