209
The two designs are the older lak'an nip, featuring concentric circles of embroidery, and the
more recent kolop' nip, with embroidery featurng a Star of David design (a six-pointed star).
The latter design may have been borrowed from Kanjobal huipils. It is related to the introduction
of lace collars, necessary to cover up the uneven line of embroidery at the neck. Older huipils
stiched in an internal layer of cloth ("servilleta"), a backing for the embroidery, for increased
warmth. More recent huipils are lighter and lack this reinforcement.
nipul, n. A patch on clothes. Ex: snipul, his patch (on his clothes). snipulal k'apak, a
patch for the cloth.
nip'ej, vtr. To want something, to desire something.
nip'ap'il, n (vtr part). A person very beloved.
nit, adj. Implied but not attested in isolation: large. Cf. nit 'akxah, nit k'anal.
nit 'akxah, n (k'en). A large steel needle such as the ones used to sew blankets or capixay seams.
Cf. also tz'islap'. Ex: snit 'akxah, his needle. snit 'akxahil k'u', the needle for sewing blankets.
nit k'anal, n (k'en). Venus, whether as Morning Star or Evening Star. = yechel páskuh, in
women's speech, because it is said to be the star that announces Christmas.
nitz k'uh, n ('anh). Plant name. Literally, Moves the Sun. A cold country plant that has huge
leaves (5-6 feet across), rounded, that serve as rain shelters. The trunk is 4-5" thick and 3-4 feet
high, the leaves on a 1/2" diameter stem 2 feet long. Cf. tz'ey, the hot country equivalent.
Gunnera sp.
nitza', vtr. To move something, e.g., move boundary markers to enlarge your rightful land.
nitzitzih -kotih, vin phrase. To come towards you very slowly. Ex: nitzitzi skotih, It's
coming towards me very slowly.
nitzitzih -p'atih, vin phrase. To move slowly towards something. Ex: nitzitzi sp'atih, It's
moving slowly closer.
nitzp'atih, vtr-dir. To move something along.
nitzk'e'ih, vtr-dir. To move something up (e.g., a hand showing the approximate height
of something).
nitzemih, vtr-dir. To move something down.
nitzelih, vtr-dir. To move something away from something.