217
nhak'an, vtr(part). Gripped in a tight place. Cf. kan nhak'an, to get stuck in an opening.
nhak'an 'ek'ih, stv phrase. Having something gripped between the teeth.
nhak'nhak' 'ochih, stv phrase. Grabbing hold of something with the teeth. =
nhak'nhak' kanih. Ex: tik nhak'nhak' kan 'och t'a k'apak, He had grabbed hold of her
skirt with his teeth.
nhal, n ('ixim). A fully mature ear of maize (with the kernels hard). Cf. hi'ih, an ear of corn with
the kernels formed but not yet hard. Ex: snhal, his ear of corn. snhalil 'ixim, the mature ears of
his corn.
nhal-, vpo root. To be big and round.
nhalan nhalan, stv phrase. Head-shaped, e.g., a pole that ends in a large ball like a head,
or a fruit unexpectedly large, like a head (but not, for instance, chilacayote, which should
be larger still). Ex: nhalan nhalan sjolom, His head is big and round.
nhaljap' sat, n phrase. Insult to people with big eyes.
nhapa', vtr. To jab a knife or a stick into something, holding it like a fencing foil.
nhapemih = nhapuchih, vtr-dir, To stick a knife or stick into something.
nhapa', vtr, implied but not attested. To dip up liquid in a large container.
nhapemih, vtr-dir. To lower a large container into a pool of water.
nhapk'etah = nhapelih, vtr-dir. To dip a large container into a tank or well, fill it, and
remove it.
nhap', n (k'inal). Rain. [NB: Proto-Mayan *najb' 'pond' gives Chuj nhajap' 'lake', while Central
Mayan *nhab' 'rain' gives Chuj nhap', rain. See Kaufman 's Mayan Etymological Database,
www.famsi.org.]
nhap', n. A measure: a handspan; from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the middle finger of the
outstretched hand. Ladinos measure to the little finger. Locally this measure is known as a
(Spanish) "cuarta." Ex: snhap', his cuarta (the measure by his hands). snhap'il, by cuartas.
nhap' (+N), num cl. Handspans (of N). Ex: jun nhap', one handspan. cha nhap', two
handspans. 'ox nhap' hin ch'al, my three handspans of string.
nhap'ej, vtr. To measure things by handspans ("cuartas," nhap').