221
nhik'p'il, vtr part. Torn.
nhila', vtr. To scatter things at random.
nhilp'atih, vtr-dir. To scatter a bunch of individual objects so that they fall in a random
pattern. Ex: nhilp'atih, Throw them out! Scatter them! tza nhilp'at ha tulusnah, You
scatter your peaches.
nhilan, vtr(part). Scattered. Ex: nhilan 'ek'ih, a few (5-6) people waiting for a bus, or a
bunch of fruits set aside as if waiting. nhilan 'emih, many fruits from a tree that have fallen to the
ground. nhilan k'e'ih, something stored up above, e.g., corn or pots kept in a loft.
nhilanh (+N), num cl (2c, O9b). Areas of loosely scattered individual objects (N), e.g.,
an area where fruits have fallen from a tree without a pattern. Cf. nhilan 'ek'ih. Ex: cha
nhilanh tulusnah,two places where peaches are lying scattered.
nhilemih, vtr-dir. To throw out a number of individual objects so that they scatter on the
ground in a random pattern. Cf. nhilan 'ek'ih. Ex: tzin nhilem tulusnah, I throw out
(scatter) a bunch of peaches.
nhixixih, stv. Grainy surface, e.g., a hand with many boils, a toad's back, a pebbled leather shoe.
nhoch'o', vtr. To bite and eat something with the incisors only, not grinding with the molars. Or,
to take a nip out of something small and fairly hard. Cf. nhotz'o'.
nhoch' (+N), num cl (1b, A16b-2). Bites and chews with the incisors only, of something
hard. Ex: jun nhoch', one bite. cha nhoch' mansan, two bites of a hard apple.
nhoj-, vpo root. To be hunched, bent over, laid on its side.
'em nhojan, vin. To duck head (bow head), or bend from the waist.
nhojan, stv. Laid on its side (a rectangular object), e.g., a bottle on its side. Ex: nhojan
'emih, bent over, e.g., head bowed, or slumped over on arms on a table; or, bent over
looking for something. Or, laid on its side below us. nhojan k'e'ih, something above (e.g.,
in a loft) laid on its side.
nhojan nhojan, stv phrase. Hunchbacked. Also said of a thin beast of burden whose head
hangs down.
nhoju patik, n phrase. Hunchbacked.
nhol-, vpo root. To be round, spherical.