223
P
pa'atz', n ('anh). Plant name. A plant that grows in the milpa, to 4-5" high, with a segmented
stem; it is difficult to clear, since when it is turned with the soil it sends out new runners, roots
sprout from the joints, and it springs back. When left to mature it has a blue flower and grows to
one foot high. When it is small, it is eaten in tamales (tamal of corn meal and pa'atz').
Tripogandra elongata.
pach-, vpo root. To be flat on opposite sides, as if molded.
pachan, stv. Flat on two opposite sides, e.g., a wheel, a two-pointed ear of corn, a basket,
a rectangular eraser, all when lying on a flat side.
pachanh (+N), num cl (2c, O). Things (N) made in a mold, e.g., bricks, adobes, cane
sugar ("panela") blocks, especially panela as formerly prepared in truncated cones. Also
bread, if it is from a mold or is loaf-shaped. Ex: cha pachanh panélah, two truncated
cones of panela. cha pachanh xan, two adobe bricks.
pacha', vtr. To carry something on a level plane, e.g., a plate of food carried level, oranges
carried in a hat. = p'acha'.
pach (+N), num cl (1a, A28a-2). Acts of carrying or handling something (N) on a flat
plate, or level. Or, level plates of N. Ex: cha pach, two acts of handling something on a
level plane. cha pach tut, two acts of carrying plates of beans.
pachap', n (k'en). Metamorphized sedimentary rock (from shale), sample identified as Schist
(low grade) by Don Blount, LSU geologist. Ex: spachap', his rock. spachap'il 'ikah, the rock
used in a sweatbath. Cf. yax pachap'.
pach'-, vpo root. Having a long, narrow head; pach' is a nickname for a person with a long,
narrow head.
pach'u jolom, n phrase. Person with a long, narrow head. Nickname is pach'.
pah, n. Bag or sack in general. Ex: spah winh, his bag. spahil nhal, a bag for corn.
pah (+N), num cl (4, 015b-2). Bagsful of N; more or less the contents of a shoulder bag
("morral"), a bag about one foot to 1-1/2 feet on a side (two sides sewn together on three
edges). Contents must be a plurality of objects (not, for example, a single rock). Ex: cha
pa nhal, two bags of maize grain. cha pa k'e'en, two bags of rocks (lots of small rocks).