281
rokan rokan, stv phrase, n (te'). = ch'ok
roko ch'ok. Spanish "garabato." A hooked
stick or short pole used to hook and hold clumps of grass when cutting with a machete.
=
roko ch'ok, n (te'). = ch'ok. = rokan rokan. Garabato. NB: Chol rok, same meaning, is
a cognate.
ronh-, vpo root. Thick and ill-made.
ronhan ronhan, stv phrase. Too thick, e.g. braided rope that is very thick; cloth with
wide stripes when thin stripes were desired.
ronhk'ochtak, adj. Ill-made, e.g., a badly made straw mat, badly-written letters (too big).
ros, n (lum). Spanish "batidor." A small, pitcher-shaped, clay vessel (rounded bottom, narrower
cylindrical neck with a handle) about 3-4" high, used to drink coffee, posol, etc. Ex: sros, his
cup. srosal skapeh, the cup for his coffee.
rosárioh, n. < Spanish "rosario." Rosary. Ex: srosárioh, his rosary (beaded necklace complete
with crucifix). srosáriohal, the beads in a rosary.
ruínah, n (lum). < Spanish "ruina." Ruins. Ex: sruínah, his ruins (on his land). sruínahil, the
ruins of someplace, now destroyed. lum ruínah, the ruins.
rumirum, n (te'). Bull-roarer. A flat, ruler-shaped piece of wood with a hole in one end for a
string to be attached. It is twirled around to make a buzzing sound. About one foot long, 1" wide,
used by children at play. Ex: te rumirum, the bull-roarer. srumirum, his bull-roarer. srumirumal
'ixta', the bull-roarer for a toy.
rumron -p'atih, vin phrase. To roll off, e.g., a rock down a hill, a fruit across the floor. Ex:
rumron sp'atih, It rolls off.
rwétah, n (te'). < Spanish "rueda." A spinning wheel, or a wheel mounted on a handle with an
offset hook on which string is tied, the wheel spun to twist fiber into rope. Cf. tarawirix. One
man spins the wheel to twist the fibers into string, the man at the other end adds more fibers until
the desired length is reached. Then the strands are doubled and retwisted, and then doubled and
retwisted again to make a lasso. Ex: te rwétah, the spinning wheel. srwétah, his spinning wheel.
srwétahil lanah, a wheel for spinning wool.