i
A DICTIONARY OF THE CHUJ (MAYAN) LANGUAGE:
INTRODUCTION
Nicholas A. Hopkins
The lexical data reported in this Chuj-English dictionary were gathered during my
dissertation field work in 1964-65. My first exposure to the Chuj language was in 1962, when I
went to Huehuetenango with Norman A. McQuown and Brent Berlin to gather data on the
languages of the Cuchumatanes (Berlin et al. 1969). At the time I was a graduate student at the
University of Texas, employed as a research assistant on the University of Chicago's Chiapas
Study Projects, directed by McQuown (McQuown and Pitt-Rivers 1970). Working through the
Maryknoll priests who were then the Catholic clergy in the indigenous areas of Huehuetenango
and elsewhere in Guatemala, we recorded material, usually in the form of 100-word Swadesh
lists (for glottochronology), from several languages. The sample included two speakers of the
Chuj variety of San Mateo Ixtatán (including the man who was later to become my major
informant).
In the Spring of 1962, as field work for the project wound down, I returned to Austin to
finish drafting my Master's thesis, and then went on to Chicago to begin graduate studies in
Anthropology at the University of Chicago, with McQuown as my major professor. I continued
to work on Chiapas project materials in McQuown's archives, and in 1963 he assigned me the
Chuj language as the topic of my upcoming doctoral dissertation. Over the next academic year I
transcribed and analyzed the Chuj materials we had collected and prepared preliminary analyses
of the phonology and morphology of the language.
At the end of the Summer of 1964, with support from a National Defense Education Act
Foreign Language Fellowship, I went to Huehuetenango to begin field work on Chuj. By the end
of August I had contracted an informant (Francisco Santizo Andrés) and rented a house in
Huehuetenango, and we began work in earnest. From then until September of 1965 we worked
an eight-hour day, six days a week, with occasional breaks when Francisco would go home and I
would go to San Cristóbal de Las Casas, where Berlin and other anthropologists and linguists
were working on their own projects.