tzuk'u', vtr. To cut something into sections by severing it with chopping blows, as in chopping
bones in two, or cutting a thin stick with an axe, or cutting a lasso with an axe.
tzul-, vpo root. To be ridged.
tzulan tzulan, stv phrase. Spiny-ridged, as the back of a skinny horse, or a man whose
backbone can be seen through the flesh, or a person with a face that has a sharp ridge down
the middle (forehead, nose, lips, chin, all pointed in front).
tzul k'e'en, n (k'en). = tzul k'en. Place name: in San Mateo, the lower point of the ridge on
which the wajxaklajunh ruins sit, east of the new school and down several levels through
the ruins. There is a cross there and much ritual is performed there.
tzulu', vtr. To cure a new pot by heating it quickly. When a new pot or kettle is first used it is
heated empty, and then a bowlful of hot stew, nixtamal, etc., is thrown into it to cure it for use (but
not water, which would cause the pot to break). This meaning is extended to using something for
the first time, e.g., to change into new clothes.
tzul (+N), num cl (1a, 1c; A31a). Acts of pushing something into a fire (N) so that it
catches quickly, and then withdrawing it aflame, e.g., dry grass. Ex: cha tzul, two times
pushing something into a fire. jun tzul k'ak', one act of pushing something into a fire.
tzulanh (+N), num cl (2c, O). Fires (N) with leaping flames. Ex: cha tzulanh k'ak', two
fires with leaping flames, e.g., two houses burning, or two flaring matches.
tzuluchih, vtr-dir. To push something into the flames so that it will catch fire quickly, and
then withdraw it, e.g., a bunch of grass. Ex: tzin tzuluch k'ak' t'ay, I shove it into the fire to
ignite and then withdraw it.
tzun...tik, adj phrase. Despicative reference to something or someone, that worthless one. Ex: ha
tzun winh tik, Ah, that guy...
tzuntzanih, vin. To molest someone. Ex: malaj mach stzuntzan winh, There is noone who molests
him. yak'an stzuntzan hep' 'ix 'ix, He molests the women. [From the text The sorceror]
tzup', n. Human saliva. Ex: stzup', his saliva. *stzup'il/al.
tzup'ej, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). Spanish "lorito," a small green insect, 1/4" long, whose head looks like
the head of a parrot.
tzute', n (lum). Place name. A place for cultivation above k'axepa', a cantón north of the river to the
north of San Mateo.