ii
We began by reviewing my preliminary analyses and correcting my errors of
transcription, as well as my phonemic analysis. At the same time Francisco learned to transcribe
Chuj in the technical orthography that we used at the time (using ¢ for the alveolar affricate, c
with hachek for the alveopalatal affricate, x for the velar fricative, etc.). Over time I elicited
Terry Kaufman's Mayan Vocabulary Survey list (a more or less 1400-item questionnaire
covering basic vocabulary for Mesoamerican languages), and a Monosyllable Dictionary. The
latter, apparently designed by Kaufman for the Chicago projects, took advantage of the CVC
shape of most Mayan roots, and involved generating the list of possible CVC combinations and
attempting to elicit vocabulary based on each. One advantage of this technique is that it elicits
vocabulary that would otherwise not occur to either the informant or the investigator, including
onomatopoetic forms as well as rarely heard lexical iterms. We also began to record narratives.
Francisco would dictate a text to the tape recorder, operated by me, and then transcribe the tape
(see Hopkins 1980b). I would go over the transcriptions and ask questions about the grammar
and lexicon. All the lexical material gathered by these techniques was put on 3 x 5 slips and filed
in the lexical file that is the basis for the present dictionary.
In February of 1965, the botanist Dennis E. Breedlove, who was working in Chiapas with
Brent Berlin on Tzeltal ethnobotany (see Berlin, Breedlove and Raven 1974, Breedlove 1981),
came to Huehuetenango to collect plants in the Cuchumatanes, including especially the Chuj-
speaking region, where there was extensive cloud forest. We collected for two days near San
Juan Ixcoy and the Captzin rocks, and then went on to San Mateo Ixtatán for four more days.
Francisco and Dennis collected the specimens and Dennis recorded the botanical information,
including the locality, altitude, etc. and remarks on the plants. Francisco and I recorded the Chuj
names of the plants and their ethnobotanical classification (in terms of the categories 'anh, te',
ch'anh, and 'ixim). According to my field notes we collected 1328 specimens in that field session
(Br 8465-9793). These data went into my lexical slip files, and the results of this and other
collecting trips were later published (Breedlove and Hopkins 1970-71). The botanical IDs from
that publication are incorporated in this dictionary.
In May of 1965 Francisco and I carried out a two-week dialect survey of the area in
which San Mateo Ixtatán Chuj was spoken, in the municipios of San Mateo Ixtatán and Nentón,
collecting material from 17 aldeas and the town center, a total of 27 questionnaires. Several texts
were recorded during this field season, and as usual, the transcribed material was incorporated
into my lexical files. At the end of this dialect survey Francisco and I collected more plant
specimens (H 0001-0038).
The collection of plant names inspired me to collect animal names as well, and to take