390
xah xah..., exclam. A cry to run off birds, e.g., from the milpa.
xajan, n (winh). Godson, Spanish "ahijado." By baptism or by marriage (i.e., the child sponsored
by oneself at his Christian baptism or marriage). Ex: xajan winh, his godson.
xajanil, adj. Beloved. Ex: halxo xajanil winh, He is beloved.
xajp'ih, vin. To soften in heat, e.g., pine sap left in the hot sun, a candle in front of the fire. Ex:
'ix xajp'ih, It softened in the heat.
xak, n (k'en). Pumice, i.e., a white porous volcanic stone so light and air-filled it floats. Found in
large deposits near San Mateo, it is used to make plaster, mashed and mixed with lime. Ex: xak
winh, his pumice. xakil k'e'en, the pumice among the rocks.
Also, Spanish "sarro," a yellow sand found only around river flats in San Mateo, used in
place of regular sand in plaster, concrete, etc. There are sometimes rocks of this, but they are
light and easily broken. It forms sometimes around trees fallen into the river, piling up on one
side and remaining, showing the impression of the tree, after the wood has rottted away.
xak'ak'ih, stv. Having lots of holes, e.g., the vessel (Spanish) "pichocha," chaynup', used to
rinse boiled corn. Or, a piece of tin perforated over and over with a nail, mud where kids have
been poking sticks to make holes; chicken wire. = xok'ok'ih.
xala', vtr. To split something, e.g., leaves, paper, an animal's ear.
xalan xalan, stv phrase. = xelan xelan. Split, or bipartite as if split.
xalanh (+N), num cl (2d, O26). = xelanh. Sections resulting from splits or appearing to
result from splits. Ex: cha xalanh xil te', a bipartite leaf.
xalmah, n. A kind of cargo frame for mules that consists of a pair of square leather bags
packed with straw or grass, joined by a leather band with a loop for a tail strap. Possibly
< Spanish, but origin unknown; cf. xala'.
xalu nheh, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). Literally, Split Tail. A bird with a split tail,
identified from pictures as an Arctic Tern (unlikely). Or, a kind of butterfly, about 1"
long, either green or black, having a split tail. Ex: xalu nhe winh, his bird. xalu nhehal
nok', the bird among the animals.
xalp'ej, vtr. To step over something, either over a raised or depressed spot, or over
something flat.