393
xecha xechan, stv phrase. A tree that has two trunks, forming a Y. = cha xechanh = cha
xachanh.
xechanh (+N), num cl (2d, O26). Forks in a tree. Ex: cha xechanh te', a tree with double
fork (Y-shaped trunk).
xej, n. Vomit; i.e., the substance that is vomitted up. Ex: xej winh,his vomit. xejal yap'il, the
vomit from an illness.
xejih, vin. To vomit.
xeja', vtr. To boil (water). Ex: xeja', It's boiling.
xek-, vpo root. To be disorderly.
xekan xekan, stv phrase. Long hair all messed up in all directions, e.g., a woman's hair
when the ties have come loose.
xekanh (+N), num cl (2c, 026). Clumps of many strands, as the roots of a plant
(ch'anhal yip'), or an untidy head of long hair on a woman, or the head of a wet-mop.
Ex: cha xekanh yip' te', two clumps of roots (pulled out of the ground). cha xekanh 'ix,
two women with rumpled loose hair.
xekekih -ek'ih, vin phrase. To walk around with disorderly hair, e.g., a sick person who
no longer takes care of himself.
xekxon -ek'ih, vin phrase. To fall to all sides, e.g., trying to walk on a slippery trail and
slipping from one side to the other, almost falling into the mud. Cf. jah xekxonok.
xeklap', n (te'). The horizontal poles tied or nailed to the vertical supporting beams (chuklap') in
roof construction if a grass (thatch) roof is to be built. The grass ('ak) is tied in 4" diameter
bundles to the xeklap'. Corresponds to the légrah in shingle roofs.
xeklap', n (te'). = xeklap'il k'ilap'. The wattle in a wattle-and-daub house. The slats are tied or
nailed on both sides of the house poles, opposite each other or staggered, and the space between
them is filled with daub (k'ilap'). Cf. k'iloj -pat.
p'o'oj xeklap', n phrase. The act of arranging the wattle on a wattle-and-daub house.
xek'el, n (te'). Plant name. A cold country plant said to be a variety of the hot country barúmbah
or wel, (Spanish) "guarumo," Cecropia sp. It grows in shape like an apple tree, the trunk not
segmented; no known fruit, but the flowers are about one foot long, balled sprigs coming out of a