409
shades. Identified as siltstone and as epidote (sedimentary and igneous stones, respectively) by
Don Blount, LSU geologist. Ex: syax pachap', his greenstone. yax pachap'il, the greenstone
among them.
yax p'a'atz', n (lum). Place name: San Sebastián Coatán. Or, the ruins in San Mateo Ixtatán said
to be where the ancestors of the San Sebastianeros once lived-below the Barillas highway where
it passes out of sight of San Mateo, above the river niwan titz'am. Also, Arroyo San Sebastián,
San Mateo.
yax p'a'atz', n (winh, 'ix). People from San Sebastián Coatán. Literally, Green Howler
Monkeys (archaic), or based on the dayname p'a'atz'. Cf. also hula', 'uk'tak, mu',
nulej, and 'amíguh, other ethnic names (Spanish "gentilicios").
yax p'aj k'o'ol, n phrase. Dirty, rumpled, or disorderly (person). Spanish "asqueroso, sucio."
yax sim, n (nok'; mam, nun). = yax xim. A small spider with a green body.
yax taj, n (nok'; mam, nun). A hairy caterpillar; some kinds sting. White, black, green, and
brown types are known.
yax toh, adj phrase. Literally, still green. Raw (meat). Unfired (pottery).
yax wa'il, n phrase ('ixim). A tortilla not cooked well and left to cool off. Cf. lo'oj, a hot but not
fully cooked tortilla.
yaxchek'ih, vin. To clear up, to lighten up, turn blue, as the sky after a storm.
yaxchek'inak, n, vin part. Cleared up, brightened, as the sky after a storm.
yaxchi'ej, vtr. To eat something raw that should be cooked, e.g., raw meat, some vegetables. Ex:
sko yaxchi'ej, We eat it raw. Cf. yax chip'ej, raw meat. Cf. chi'ah, to eat (by biting).
yaxil, n. For plants, humus. For humans, the source of earnings. If a plant drops its leaves at its
base to serve as humus, this is its yaxil. The employment one has, or the land and herds one
owns, is one's yaxil. Ex: syaxil, his (its) source of earnings. NB: syaxilal, the green ones among
the others.
yaxlewih, vin. To become greenish (people). Ex: syaxlewih, He becomes greenish.
yaxp'ih, vin. To become greenish (cannot refer to people, cf. yaxlewih).
yaxp'i'elih, vin-dir. To become greenish. Ex: syaxp'i 'elih, It becomes greenish.