414
yoh, exclam. An exclamation on dropping something and not seeing where it fell, or glimpsing
an animal in the brush and trying to see it again.
yok, poss n. Literally, "its foot/leg." Also used in the sense of rays emanating from some source.
yok, poss n. The length of something, literally, "its leg," cf. 'ok. Ex: jantak yok, How
long is it? *yokil.
yok k'ak', n phrase. Firelight, literally, "the legs of the fire."
yok k'uh, n phrase. Sunlight, literally, "the legs of the sun."
yokech, n (k'en). The three stones of the hearth, on which cooking pots are set. NB: The three-
stone hearth is one of the cultural features that defines the area of Mesoamerica (Paul Kirchhoff,
1943, Mesoamérica. Sus límites geográficos, composición étnica y carácteres culturales, Acta
Americana 1(1):92-107). Ex: syokech, his fire stones. syokechal chen, the stones prepared to hold
a pot.
yoktak, n. Feet. An element in place names, the mouth (literally, foot) of rivers and streams. NB:
In the anatomical metaphor applied to streams, the head, jolom, is the uppermost part, the foot,
'ok, is the discharge.
yoktak ha nich'ina', n phrase (ha'). Place name. Mouth of the Nichiná. The confluence
of the nich'ina' (a stream) and the Río Yolá, San Mateo. Literally, Foot of the Nichiná.
yoktak ha pakuma'al, n (ha'). Place name. Confluence of the Arroyo Pacumal and Río
Pacumal, San Mateo. Literally, Foot of the Pacumal.
yoktak ha p'ekcha', n (ha'). Place name: stream flowing from the Laguneta La Meona to
the Río Pajelná, Xan Mateo. Literally, Foot of the p'ekcha'.
yoktak ha xonhkol, n (ha'). Place name. Río Nupxuptenam, San Mateo. Literally, Foot
of the xonhkol.
yoktak ha wayis nhah, n (ha'). Place name: confluence of the Arroyo Guaisná and the
Río Pacumal, San Mateo. Literally, Foot of the Guaisná.
yoktak ha yal 'uk'el, n (ha'). Place name: termination of the Río Yaloquel, San Mateo.
Literally, Foot of the Yaloquel.
yoktak ha yola k'an witz, n (ha'). Place name: confluence of a northern tributary and the
Río Pacumal, San Mateo. Literally, Foot of the yola k'an witz.