416
yol taj, n (ha'). Place name: southern tributary of Río Yolá, San Mateo. Literally, Pine
Center.
yol tenam, n (lum, ha'). Place name: Yoltenam, San Mateo, a caserío of Ixpajau. Or, the
confluence of the Río Pojom and an arroyo that orginates in Matasano, San Mateo.
Literally, Boulder Center.
yol witz, n (lum). Place name: cantón of San Mateo Ixtatán, in the east section of town,
south of a line between the church and the new school (i.e., the ruins of wajxaklajunh).
See Field Notes, August 31-September 6, 1964. Literaly, Mountain Center.
yul ch'en, n (lum). Place name: Yulchén, San Mateo, an aldea where Santa Eulalia
Kanjobal is spoken; the name is the Kanjobal equivalent of Chuj yol k'e'en, Rock Center.
yul witz, n (lum). Place name: Yolhuitz Grande, Barillas, an aldea where Santa Eulalia
Kanjobal is spoken; the name is the Kanjobal equivalent of Chuj yol witz, Mountain
Center.
yol 'ok, n phrase. The sole of the foot. Literally, the center of the foot. Ex: yol wok, the sole of
my foot.
yol cha'anh, n phrase. Attic of a house, Spanish "tapesco." The area above the house beams that
cross horizontally above the walls, where things are stored. Ex: yol scha'anh = yol xcha'anh, his
attic. yol schanhil spat, the attic of his house.
yol kamix, n (k'apak). Undershirt, of the armless variety. Or, a dress shirt to be worn with a suit
over it. Ex: yol skamix, his undershirt.
yol lolis, n. Vagina. Cf. hapu yol lolis, exclam.
yol lumal te', n (te'). Plant name. Br 8774. Eupatorium hospitale. Perhaps literally, Center of the
Earth Tree.
yol nhi', n. Nostril of the nose.
yol pup', n (lum). Clay ball for blowguns. Ex: syol pup', his balls. yol pup'al, for blowgun shot;
i.e., something exchanged for balls, or balls exchanged for something.
yol sat, n phrase. The eye (in its entirety).
yol tza', n phrase. Liquid found in the intestines. Ex: yol stza', the liquid in his intestines.
yola', poss n phrase. Stream. Literally, "in the center of the water," y-'ol-ha'. An element in place