26
'isim, n implied but not attested unpossessed. See yisim, various kinds of spikes and extensions.
'isis, n ('ixim). Green corn mature enough to come off the cob, Spanish "equiguay." Ground raw
and made into thick pancakes. Ex: yisis, his green corn; yisisal kapeh, green corn to eat with
coffee.
'is 'at, n phrase. Lazy person, Spanish "haragán." Ex: 'is 'at, Lazybones! 'is yat, He's lazy. yis 'at,
his lazybones, a lazy person in his family. yisal 'at, laziness, his laziness. *yis yat. [Literally,
Potato Prick?]
'istzil, n ('ix). Kin term: Wife (male speaker). In reference, 'ix wistzil, my wife. In address,
wistzil, my wife. Reciprocal, wichmil, my husband.
'istzilej, vtr. To have sexual relations with a woman (literally, to make her one's wife). :
loch'ej. Ex: swistzilej, I copulate with her.
'istzilwel, n. The act os sexual intercourse. Cf. loch'.
'istzilwih, vin. To have sexual intercourse (without specifying the object). Ex:
tz'istzilwih, He's having sex. tz'istzilwih winh, The man is having intercourse.
'iskalérah, n. A staircase, < Spanish "escalera." Ex: yiskalérah, his staircase; yiskalérahil spat,
the staircase in his house.
'iskínah, n. Corner of a house (inside corner), or a street corner. < Spanish "esquina." Ex:
yískinah, his corner (that he owns); yískinahil spat, the corner of his house.
'iskuwélah, n. School. < Spanish "escuela." Ex: yiskuwélah, his school; yiskuwelahil chonhap',
the school for a town.
'itaj, n ('anh). Greens, vegetables; radish, cabbage, beets, milkweed, and any edible greens or
vegetables. Includes tz'ikin 'itaj, kaxlanh 'itaj, k'ap' taj tzil, k'u chi'il, pilox 'itaj, tuyal 'itaj.
Ex: yitaj, his vegetables; yitajil chip'ej, vegetables to cook with meat.
'itz'inal, n. Place name: Cerro Ixtenam, San Mateo. A large rock outcrop to one side of the aldea
yolk'ultak. The term has no other meaning in Chuj, but in other Mayan languages (e.g., Tzeltal,
Tzotzil) it is a kin term, "younger brother." The Chuj story of its origin is that it is half of a rock
outcrop (Spanish "peña") of the same shape and name as one somewhere in Mexico. Before the
Sun came up for the first time the peña was growing bigger and bigger, almost up to the sky, but
when the Sun came, in the world's first day, the force of its rays split the peña in half and tossed
part of it into Mexico, where it is found today. The part there is said to be brightly colored in