iii
notes on their native classification. Absent field work on the project, we consulted reference
books, including Ibarra's Mamíferos de Guatemala, Alvarez del Toro's Reptiles de Chiapas, and
Peterson's Field Guides to the birds. Many of the names had been collected through the Mayan
Vocabulary Survey elicitation or the Monosyllable Dictionary. In the process of recording this
information, I began to uncover the Chuj system of gender markers that partitioned the animals
into coherent classes, and Francisco went through the lexical files and added the gender markers
to the slips. The results of this investigation were published in the ill-fated Journal of Mayan
Linguistics (Hopkins 1980a).
In Guatemala City I had acquired the topographical maps for the region of
Huehuetenango (Dirección General de Cartografía, 1963; see Field Notes, 6-12 September,
1964) and Francisco and I pored over the maps place by place as I recorded the Chuj names,
most of which were garbled in the Spanish versions (the locative yich, 'base of', for instance, was
almost inevitably transcribed Ix-). I ultimately delivered to the Instituto Nacional de Geografía
and to the Instituto Indigenista Nacional a corrected list, for what that was worth. My analysis of
the formation of Chuj place names was later publshed (Hopkins 1972), and all the place names
were added to my lexical files. The Spanish place names reported here are the official names, as
registered in the Diccionario geográfico de Guatemala (Dirección General de Cartografía 1961-
62).
A graduate student in Geology from LSU was living in Huehuetenango in 1964-65, and
he identified some of the rocks and minerals we had names for. For the results of his study and
related work in the Cuchumatanes by him and his colleagues, see Blount 1967 and Anderson et
al. 1973.
In August of 1965, Dennis Breedlove and Brent Berlin came to Guatemala to collect
plants and discuss further projects. With Francisco's help, they collected near Antigua and then
again in the Chuj area, all together another 292 specimens (Br 11397-11689). Brent and I met
with Chris Day, another Chicago graduate student (in the field working on Jacaltec while I was
working on Chuj, see Day 1973), about a comparative study of numeral classifiers in the three
languages, Tzeltal, Jacaltec and Chuj. Over the next few years we collaborated in a preliminary
project, but never brought it to fruition. The plan was for Chris to compile and compare the
vocabularies, Brent to write up the semantics (as in his 1964 and 1968 monographs), and for me
to analyze the grammars. Only the grammatical analysis reached publication (Hopkins 1970).
However, all the information I had generated about the Chuj numeral classifiers went into my
slip files.
I returned to Chicago in September, 1965, to finish my graduate work and my doctoral