34
He went around it.
'u'uj, u'uj, n. Attested only in possessed form. On behalf of someone or something. Cf. yuj chi',
because of (that).
'uch, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', chichim). Dove, Spanish "paloma." Larger than the kuwaj te', with red
eyes. Seeks out places where there is salt, especially around a salt river north of San Mateo (past
the first ridge north). No known song.
'uch + Name, n phrase. A form of familiar address or reference to a younger female. Cf. naj +
Name, the corresponding form for males, and nux + Name, the form for older females. Ex: 'uch
xuwan, Young Juana. ha 'uch xuwan, that's Young Juana. ha 'uch chi', that young girl.
'uchikin, n (k'en). Earrings (< 'uh + chikin). Ex: wuchikin, my earrings. yuchikinal sk'inh,
earrings bought for a fiesta.
'uchum, n (yap'il). Malaria, Spanish "paludismo." = sik yap'il. An illness that gives alternate
fever and chills (like malaria) about a month after its infection. Said to hit especially cold
country people in hot country in the first rain of the cuaresma, from breathing the odor of the wet
growth and mud, or people who get a fright while in country where there is paludismo. Ex: yap'il
yuchum winh, his paludismo; yuchumal ha', the paludismo danger from some water.
'uh, exclam. Women's speech: An exclamation of surprise and sympathy, e.g., on seeing
someone fall (a child, or a drunk), or on seeing another woman's skirt fly up as she falls down.
'uj, n. A month, or, especially in women's speech, the Moon, by which they calculate their
periods. Cf. chi'ich. Ex: yuj winh, his month (of work). yujal, by month. yujal payan, the month
for clearing.
'uj yat, n phrase. Squint-eyed (person). Ex: 'uj yatin, I am squint-eyed. yuj yat, his squint-eyed
relative. yuj yatil, the squint-eyed one among them.
'uka', vtr implied but not attested. To drive something.
'ukanih, vin. To be driving something. Ex: ha' tz'ukanih, Water drives it (e.g., a water
wheel).
'ukum károh, n phrase. Driver, Spanish "chofer."
'ukwih + N, vin phrase (vtr + incorporated object). To drive something (N), e.g., a car or
truck. Literally, to car-drive, to truck-drive. Ex: tz'ukwih károh, He drives a car.