iv
dissertation (Hopkins 1967). I then took a job teaching Anthropology at the University of Texas
in Austin, and continued to process my Chuj materials. I married Kathryn Josserand in 1970 and
spent a year in Milwaukee, where she had been teaching, and then returned to Texas. In 1973 we
left Texas for Mexico City, at the invitation of Angel Palerm to establish the Programa de
Lingüística at the new Centro de Investigaciones Superiores del INAH that he directed (now
CIESAS, the Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social). Work on
Chuj was abandoned in favor of field training and research on languages closer to Mexico City,
especially Otomanguean languages. A few years later, because we had begun to follow the
developments in Maya epigraphy, we began to work on Mayan languages again, but field work
was on Chol, not Chuj.
I did not return to work on Chuj until 2005-6, when I received a National Endowment for
the Humanities Documenting Endangered Languages Fellowship. This fellowship allowed me to
prepare my Chuj materials for digitization and archiving at the Archive of the Indigenous
Languages of Latin America (AILLA, www.ailla.utexas.org). Now, in 2012, all my recorded
materials on Chuj are archived. Along with my transcribed Field Notes and field Photos, a
revised version of my dissertation, rewritten in modern practical orthography, will complete this
collection.
The collection includes all the recorded and transcribed Chuj texts, some 40 samples of
Chuj speech from eight Chuj settlements, some of which no longer exist. More than twenty of
the settlements reported here as place names were abandoned or destroyed in the genocide of the
so-called civil war (Manz 1988:83-89). It is my intention to add to the AILLA archive collection
much of my written material as well, including extensive notes made while discussing grammar
and lexicon with Francisco Santizo Andrés. All this material is to be freely available to anyone
interested, and an electronic version of the present Dictionary will be added to the collection.
In the Summer of 2011, I dug out of a closet a wooden chest that contained four drawers
of lexical slip files, untouched since about 1970. Over the next few months I transcribed the
lexical entries into an electronic text file, rewriting the orthography into the now official Chuj
script (Lenguas Mayas de Guatemala, 1988). I have attempted to make sure that these materials
include all the data on plant and animal names, place names, numeral classifiers, etc., that I had
previously published.
Enjoy!