V
GRAMMAR NOTES
The abbreviations and other grammatical notations that are used in dictionary entries are
dscussed below. In general the categories are based on Hopkins (1967) and were established
from field data and discussions with the major informant, Francisco Santizo Andrés, a native of
San Mateo Ixtatán, Huehuetenango, Guatemala. In a few cases the status of a lexical item has
been confirmed by reference to a study of the other Chuj dialect, that of San Sebastián Coatán
(Felipe Diego 1998).
In a series of articles (1995-2007), the Mexican linguist Cristina Buenrostro has
presented extensive analyses of several aspects of San Mateo Ixtatán Chuj grammar and syntax.
Likewise, Judith M. Maxwell has published a number of articles (1976-2001) on Chuj grammar
and discourse, concentrating on San Sebastián Chuj, the language of her dissertation (Maxwell
1976). Some details of their analyses differ from the morphological analyses given below.
Structure of the Dictionary Entries
Typical entries in the dictionary begin with the lexical item, in bold, followed by the
grammatical classification of the item and other relevant information (noun or verb class,
numeral classifier categories, etc.). An English gloss follows, with commentary that may include
a Spanish gloss (in parentheses). Examples of usage (in italics) and cross-references to other
entries are then given. Lexical items in certain categories (e.g., plant names) may be
accompanied by further information. Occasionally, forms tested and found ungrammatical are
apppended (marked by an asterisk). Examples are:
'ak, n ('anh). Plant name, Spanish "paja." A long grass used in constructing thatch roofs,
tied in bundles to a network of poles. Usually brought from (and bought in) aldeas of
yichpajaw, yaka', and jolomtenam. Cheaper than shingles, and more durable (up to 30
years), but less preferred because of fire hazard. Br 8569. Muhlenbergia macroura.
The lexical item 'ak is a noun, a plant name associated with the noun classifer 'anh (herbs). The
local Spanish term for this plant is "paja." Its use is described, and a collection specimen noted
(Br 8569), with its botanical identification.
'ikej, vtr. To make someone the owner of something, Ex: tzikej, He makes him the owner
(i.e., he gives it to him). wikej, (Let this be) mine!. (Let me have it!). 'ikej, "It's yours!" (in
response to a question about what you're going to do with that thing you have, "It's
yours!," "It's for you!."
The lexical item 'ikej is a transitive verb. Its meaning is given and usage exemplified.