51
chayayih, stv. Material whose insides can be seen, e.g., a marble that is almost
translucent, beads if the perforation can be seen inside them, a plastic case whose
contents can be seen.
chayp'ih, vin. To become chayayih, transparent or translucent so that the insides can be
seen.
chay-, vpo root (or vtr implied but unattested). To be hanging (to hang something) delicately.
chayan 'ochih, vpo or vtr(part) phrase, Teetering inwards, e.g., a door off its top hinge
leaning in towards the room.
chayan 'k'e'ih, vpo or vtr(part) phrase. Barely standing, as a candle standing up in
delcate balance.
chayum, n ('ixim). A string loop of selected ears of corn to be used for seed. The ears are hung
by the husks to the string and the loop hanging on a nail in a ceiling beam.
che'ej, n. The act of grinding. Cf. chenih, to grind. Ex: 'ayin che'ej, I have grinding to do.
che'ew, n (k'en). Frost, Spanish "helado." Ex: xche'ew, his frost. xchewal, the cold caused by hail
or frost, e.g., jantak xchewal ha', How cold the water is! (after a frost).
chej, n (nok'; kawayuh, yewax). Horse, mule, or burro; Spanish "bestia." NB: Originally 'deer',
cf. k'ultakil chej.
chej chan, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', 'ix). A snake with the form of a beast of burden, about 3-4 feet high,
said to live only in the mountains and serve as a beast of burden to the mountain. Literally, Deer
Snake (= Nahuatl mazacoatl, Boa). Said also to occur in the ruins in San Mateo (wajxaklajunh).
Cf. wakax chan, another legendary snake that has a mouth like a horse; some say it has feet as
well.
chej te', n (te'). Plant name. A brush tree used for firewood only. Resembles a peach in size and
bark, has round leaves about 2" across, thick. Br 8624, 8787, 11488. Viburnum disjunctum, V.
jucundum. See also chak chej te'.
chej te', n (ha'). Place name: an arroyo that flows through Montaña Achejté, San Mateo.
chej ti', n. A dirty mouth, i.e., with food stains all around it. Ex: schej ti', his dirty-mouthed
relative. schejal sti', the filth on his mouth.
cheka', vtr implied but not attested. To send someone on an errand, to tell someone to go