63
chonho', vtr. To sell something. Ex: tas ha chonho', What are you selling?
chonhap', n (lum). Village or town, especially San Mateo Ixtatán, ko chonhap', our
town. Ex: xchonhap', his village.
chonhap'il, n. The culture of a village or town, "village-ness." The customs and habits
acquired from a village as one's heritage. Ex: xchonhap'il, his culture as inherited from
the village. ko chonhap'il yikonh lesal, It's our custom to pray. ko chonhap'il, our culture.
chachonh, n. Resale, e.g., buying something cheap and then reselling it for a profit.
chonhej, n. Four days from now. Cf. chanh, four.
chonhjih, n. Four days ago. Cf. chanh, four.
chonhjih ta xoh, n phrase. It's now been four days.
chor, n. A whistle used by policemen (the object, not the sound). Ex: xchor, his whistle. *choral,
choril.
chor (+N), num cl (1a,b; A23). Times blowing a whistle (chor). Ex: cha chor chor, two
times blowing a whistle.
chornajih, vin. To blow a whistle. Ex: 'ix chornaj winh, He blew (a whistle).
choro', vtr. To lift long objects and carry them in vertical position, as when carrying a marimba.
choran choran, stv phrase. A long, tall bundle of grass, cane, poles, firewood, etc.,
stacked very tall for carrying, forming a vertical column. Or, stacked in rows, the pieces
side by side and the layers well ordered, e.g., a "tercio" (load) of firewood stacked not in
a rounded pile but in a square one. Also, a steep roof, or a marimba.
choranh (+N), num cl (2c, O24a). Columns of N, e.g., firewood, stacked in square, log-
cabin construction, for drying (open stack with layers alternating at 90 degrees rotation).
Ex: cha choranh k'atzitz, two columns of stacked firewood.
chóroh, n (te'). < Spanish "chorro," a jet of water. A hollowed-out or trenched pole used to carry
water off from a spring, an aqueduct. This word is giving way to kanúwah, from Spanish
"canoa," water trough. Ex: xchóroh, his aqueduct. xchórohal ha', the water's aqueduct.
chot-, vpo root. To be hunkered down, squatting, with legs bent.
chot, num cl (1a, A26). Hops in sitting positions, as a toad moves along not ever really