vii
('atz'am)
Salt and salt products.
(k'inal)
Rains and weather phenomena.
(yap'il)
Illnesses (but some are classified as winh).
(nayleh)
Sheet plastic and its products.
If a noun is marked animal (nok'), there follows a notation for its gender markers, the
terms that would precede the animal name if the speaker wishes to specify the gender, e.g., nok'
xip' ko'on, nok' 'ix ko'on, male and female pocket gophers. The combination of male and female
gender markers, e.g., (xip', 'ix), ('ajtzo', chichim), divides animals into four basic categories
based on locomotion: mammals (xip', 'ix) are walkers; birds, including bats ('ajtzo', chichim) are
fliers; fish ('ajtzo', nun) are swimmers; and reptiles/amphibians ('ajtzo', 'ix) are crawlers. Some
mammals are marked with (ch'a'ak) or (mam) for males, and with (nun) for females.
Invertebrates are diversely marked. An extensive discussion of these markers is found in
Hopkins (1980).
If the noun or noun phrase is a plant name (te', ch'anh, 'anh, 'ixim), there may follow a
botanical identification. The majority of these are taken from Breedlove and Hopkins (1970-
71). These IDs are preceded by the collection numbers, H for Hopkins and Br for Breedlove;
specimens have been deposited in the Dudley Herbarium of Stanford University (DS) with a
duplicate set sent to the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago (F). Some identifications of
common plants were made (by Breedlove) without collected specimens. Note that in the 1970-71
publication, the informant's descriptions of the plants-other than uses-were generally omitted,
given the scientific IDs. They have been included here to give an indication of the salient
characteristics of the plants as far as the informant was concerned. [Incidentally, there are many
comparisons of tree sizes to peach trees; the only tree in the lot where we lived and worked in
Huehuetenango was a peach tree about ten feet high-an easy reference point.],
A few identifications are based on the Spanish common name as registered in Schoenhals
(1988) or Santamaría (1959). Some animals were identified by the informant by reference to
Ibarra (1959). Bird identifications sometimes employed Peterson's Field Guides (1947, 1963).
The informant's descriptions of birds are probably accurate but clearly inadequate for
identification. They have been preserved here because they are at least more informative than "a
kind of bird."
Place names, both geographical (lum, k'en) and hydrographical (ha') in nature, are
mostly drawn from Hopkins (1972). These names may be marked by noun classifiers as land