76
Fly in groups large enough to fill a tree when they land.
ch'ilon, n (lum). Place name. An abandoned salt mine in San Mateo, on the south side of town
above the river. Was in regular use twenty years ago and is still used occasionally. Also, (ha')
ch'ilon, part of the Río Pajelná, San Mateo.
ch'ipal, n ('anh). Plant name. A wild plant with a top like an onion and a root like a radish, but
black outside and white inside. The root is mashed by beating, with water, until it foams. The
foam is used to wash hair. Found near San Mateo. Probably Agave brachystachys. Cf. chak
ch'ipal, ch'ipal k'uh.
ch'ipal, n (lum). Place name: The plain where the cemeteries of the aldea yolk'ultak are located.
ch'ipal k'uh, n ('anh). Plant name: A plant resembling the ch'ipal, but lacking the useable root;
not used for anything. Literally, "the Sun's ch'ipal." Probably Anthericum sp.
ch'ina', vtr. To grab something delicately by the fingertips.
ch'inelih, vtr-dir. To grab someone by the clothes and push him aside or out of the way.
ch'iran, stv. Warped. Ex: ch'iran ch'iran, a warped sheet of something, e.g., a book cover that
raises up when the book is on its side, a warped sheet of tin, a curled drying leaf, a wooden
shingle warped by the sun. Cf. k'e ch'iran, 'em ch'iran.
ch'it-, vpo root. To be spraying, putting out liquid.
ch'ititih-tza', stv phrase. To defecate a lot; to have diarrhea. Ex: ch'ititi stza', He has
diarrhea.
ch'itch'itan -tzup', stv phrase. To spit a lot. Ex: sch'itch'itan stzup', He spits a lot.
ch'iw, onom. The song of many kinds of birds, or the cheep of a lost baby chick. Ex: ch'iw
ch'iw..., the song of the ch'ilon bird.
ch'iw chay, n (nok'; 'ajtzo', nun). Any small fish (1-2" long) sold the market, from Río Ixcan or
the Pacific Coast. The ch'iw refers to the size, not the type.Ex: xch'iw chayil ha', the fish in the
water.
ch'ix, n ('ixim). A tamale without meat, pure corn meal. Ex: xch'ix, his tamale. xch'ixal k'inh,
tamale for a fiesta.
ch'ix, exclam. You! A form of address used only between women, corresponding to male keh.
Between sexes, only names are used. = ch'ix 'ey.