Johnson / A Grammar of San Miguel Chimalapa Zoque
learned this story. Satornino was a well-known teller of tall tales, all about
himself and his adventures. This story took place (if it is true) during the time
of the Mexican Revolution in the 1920's. Satornino guides a group of Mexian
soldiers into the jungle to capture some baby monkeys. The plan is to shoot
some mother monkeys down from the trees, and then take away the babies that
they are carrying on their backs. The Mexican soldiers try in vain to shoot the
monkeys with their rifles. Finally, they ask Satornino to help, and he
immediately kills two of them with two shots from his bola². They all head
back to town and recount the story to the mayor, and then to Satornino's wife.
The second story was told by Sr. Camilo Miguel Sánchez, who translated
on the fly from a Spanish children's story. It is called 'The Two-Legged One'
(ZOH001R026). This story is about a little spotted jaguar, who goes forth into
the jungle to seek his own prey. He is searching for the Two-Legged One, a
creature that he has only heard about and desires to confront to prove his
prowess as a hunter. He encounters several animals along the way, whom he
questions, kills, and eats. Finally, he meets a man - the Two-Legged One.
They agree to a duel, and count off the paces. The little jaguar turns and leaps
at the man, who pulls out his gun and shoots him. The little jaguar manages to
return to his mother, but then he dies.
The third text was narrated by Sra. Teófila Sánchez Morales (Sr. Sánchez's
sister). It is called 'A Housewife's Day' (ZOH001R053), and is an account of her
daily routine. She begins by describing her husband's work clearing a
planting a chayote³ field. Then she details her work: grinding corn, preparing
food, washing clothes, tending her children, etc.
2 This is a rope with a leather pocket at the end used for hurling rocks. Bolas are still used
today to chase birds out of the cornfield.
3 Known in English as a 'mirleton', this is a mildly-flavored squash-like vegetable.
350