acceptable given the right context². In example (iii), then, the recipient is not
cross-referenced on the verb, except by means of the plural suffix.
6.2.2. The person hierarchy and inverse alignment
MIG Zoque exhibits a person hierarchy (Silverstein, 1976), in which first
and second persons outrank third person entities. (There are no grammatical
distinctions among possible sorts of third person entities, as in an animacy
hierarchy.) When a higher-ranked agent acts on a lower-ranked patient, or
when both agent and patient have equal rank, we have a direct role-marking
situation. The first three examples in (6.10) illustrate direct role-marking
first or second person agents acting on third person patients, or a third person
agent acting on a third person subject. Similarly, the examples in (6.11) show
first or second person agents acting on equally-ranked first or second person
patients; these are also all examples of direct role-marking.
However, when a lower-ranked agent acts on a higher-ranked patient
(6.10 iv-v), we have an inverse role-marking situation (Klaiman, 1992). In these
situations it is the higher-ranked argument that is encoded on the verb. When
a third person agent acts on a first person patient, the verb is marked with the
first person absolutive marker də (examples 6.12 i-iii)³. When a third person
agent acts on a second person patient, the verb is marked with the 3>2 marker
mi. Inverse role-marking does not produce any ambiguous constructions, since
2 This is a story about a man who is so lazy, that when his friends refuse to feed him any
longer, he tells them to just go ahead and bury him.
3 Kaufman (1996) suggests that the third person ergative marker ?əy+ is absorbed by the
preceding vowel, noting that the order of agreement markers is OSV generally in Mixe-Zoquean
languages. I'm not entirely convinced of this, since there are many cases of ?əy+ cliticizing
onto a wide variety of preceding phonological contexts in which the final glide is still clearly
audible.
122