Johnson / A Grammar of San Miguel Chimalapa Zoque
constructions, including verb stem compounding, are described in chapter 8.
The structure of a noun phrase is presented in chapter 9; this includes
discussion of quantifiers and definiteness. Noun incorporation is described in
chapter 10. Multi-clause expressions, including relative clauses, coordination,
and subordinated clauses, are discussed in chapter 11. Questions and the
modal operators that pertain solely to questions are discussed in chapter 12. A
deeper discussion of aspect (beyond the simple facts of inflection) appears in
chapter 13. Finally, an analysis of MIG Zoque narrative text conventions and
discourse markers appears in chapter 14. This will also involve further
discussion of word order, as it relates to issues of topic and recency. There are
six appendices. Appendix A describes the on-line lexicon. Appendices B-D list
complete tables of deictics, time, and space adverbials. Appendix E gives a
larger set of number words than the brief discussion in section 4.4.1, and
Appendix F provides a set of examples of permissible permutations of word
orders in sentences with varying numbers of core arguments.
I have tried to make this grammar as complete as possible, but much has
necessarily been left out. It is in many cases impossible to determine
conclusively if some sub-construction is an error, albeit a commonly-made
one, or an alternative means of expression. For example, there are several
instances in the corpus of an auxiliary verb construction (chapter 8) in which
the pronominal agreement argument is duplicated at the left edge of the
phrase. I do not know if this happened because the speaker changed his or her
mind in mid-sentence, or if it is a grammatical alternate. I was not able to elicit
examples of this kind, and so chose not to include it in the description of
auxiliary verb phrases. People have an untidy habit of speaking without regard
for the difficulties of the poor grammarian, who wants her data neatly sorted
9