Acknowledgements
There are many people to thank for the completion of this dissertation,
for direct and indirect assistance, advice, and comfort at every stage of the
project. To begin at the very beginning, I must first thank my parents, Dale and
Carmen Johnson, for bringing my brothers and I along on their field expeditions
to Mexico, Guatemala, and New Mexico. My mother taught me Spanish (so I
could run errands for her) and my father won the grants that allowed us to
spend nearly every summer of my childhood romping around in Indian villages.
What could be more natural than tortillas and chile for breakfast?
Next I must thank my advisor, Anthony Woodbury, for inspiring me to
study an endangered language through his excellent course, A Survey of Native
American Languages. Once the idea was hatched, he magically summoned up a
field work opportunity from his network of Americanists, and I was off to
Mexico the very next month to work with the MesoAmerican Languages
Documentation Project, headed by Terrence Kaufman and John Justeson.
I can't thank Terry enough for his constant support of my research, from
the very first summer when I knew nothing about field work (nor even what
ergative meant) to the final stages of writing this grammar. Without his
compendious knowledge and willingness to read draft after draft, this work
would be substantially less accurate and complete. There isn't anyone else in
the world that I can call up on a Wednesday night to ask "Is my verb kum-
enterar or enterrar?" and get an answer!
Another teacher, in the guise of a fellow student, is Roberto Zavala
Maldonado, who also joined the project that summer of 1994. I learned how to
organize field work tasks from Terry, and how to analyze texts from Tony, but I
learned how to actually do field work, day after day, sitting at a table with my
consultant, from Roberto. He has also helpfully read drafts and given me
whirlwind tours of MesoAmerican languages to save me hours in the library, for
which I owe him at least a couple of beers at the Siete Brujos in Catemaco.
Roberto is also the one who encouraged me to make a quick trip to San Miguel
Chimalapa at the end of my first summer in the field, and told me which
documents to get to impress the Fulbright board. Without his advice, I would
probably not have won the grants, and thus not been able to pursue this
vi