EXCLUSIVELY SUFFIXING LANGUAGES
Major thrust of this study is to explore and describe
the characteristics and implications of "exclusively" suffixing
languages, that is, of languages with no prefix morphemes.
Several such languages will be compared and contrasted. Parti-
cular emphasis will be focused on the structures formed by the
position classes of their suffixes. There are methodological,
typological, and classificational implications. Base of the
comparison and contrast will be the clear-cut structure of the
applicant's dissertation language, Tukano. Operational stand-
point is that a morphology-oriented grammar provides the most
revealing appreciation for suffixing languages.
Methodological concern deals first with definitional
criteria as they are applied to each language, then with the
privileges of occurrence of root morphemes with suffix mor-
phemes as they form word classes. These word classes will be
examined in terms of their paradigmability, particularly that
of the combinations and permutations of suffix structures
"across the board," whether these suffix position classes occur
in ranges and continua or in oppositions, whether they are open
classes or closed classes, etc. Languages will be assessed in
terms of whether they have clear-cut or "fuzzy" categories--or
whether the "fuzziness" is an artifact of their description.
A running, annotated bibliography will be kept on these descrip-
tions as to how conveniently they lend themselves to this study,
especially in terms of: whether they overtly distinguish be-
tween bound forms and non-bound forms; to what extent word
forms can be re-synthesized from their tables and categories of
suffixes; to what extent the suffix position classes leave
"loose ends" or not; and even to what extent an orthographic
preoccupation may superficially subvert attention from their
content. Some source descriptions will need rewriting for this
study. But the unique categories of each language--part of
Sapir's "genius" of each language--will be kept in prominent
relief. Particularly valued are sui generis descriptions.
Typological concern takes up first the proposition that
the applicant feels that Tukano furnishes a classic but hitherto
unknown example of Sapir's agglutinative type of language; in
fact, it may represent a new, albeit minor, subtype, namely
"exclusively" suffixing languages--languages without prefix mor-
phemes. Inasmuch as there are many such languages in South
America, as also elsewhere, this suggests comparison and con-
trast among such languages for regularities and correlations,
and, for instance, to explore for hypothetical structural pres-
suring. Functional and other typological concerns, such as word
order, will also be addressed. --Nor will the predicament that
the descriptions of these languages in a research language,
English, that in itself is fusional with strong isolating
tendencies, be lost upon the study.
1