Classificational concern almost immediately accompanies
typological concern. The typological classification of these
languages has direct implications for their classification in
phylum linguistics and in particular towards Greenberg's hypo-
thetical Andean-Equatorial phylum and now its superordinate
Amerindian. While Tukano and Quechua are both exclusively suf-
fixing languages, and while both belong to Greenberg's Andean-
Equatorial phylum, the applicant has found no form-and-meaning
resemblances between them; furthermore, their suffix systems
are at great variance with each other--certainly not "one-by-
one, two-by-two" comparable. But there are tantalizing agree-
ments on those shared concepts or meaning classes that are
always found suffixed, that is, never as free-standing words,
in all exclusively suffixing languages, and even on the loca-
tions of these suffixes vis-a-vis each other and the word stem.
It is the exploring and describing of the patterns among these
agreements and disagreements that form the major thrust of this
study. Then, suggestive items of evidence can be indicated as
they may pertain to these further, corollary questions: the
possibility of structural pressuring to account for some of
these suffixal structures; the possibility of either their
parallel development versus their spread by conceptual diffu-
sion from language to language; and any indications towards
their amalgamation (evolving) or dissolution in agglutina-
tive languages.
Planned approach and line of thought are that because of
its clear-cut categories and its familiarity to the applicant,
the morphological structure of Tukano will furnish the base from
which several other languages will be compared. Pairs of langu-
ages to be compared and contrasted include Tukano & Quechua,
Tukano and Aymara, and an excursion into Tukano and (polysyn-
thetic) "Eskimo"; tentatively, Tukano & Tarascan, Tukano &
Miwok; Tukano & (polysynthetic) Nootka; and Tukano and a Turkic
language (preferably other than Turkish because of its many
literary influences from Arabic and Persian).
As for its current state, the groundwork and operating
model for this on-going study have already been developed.
note in the applicant's résumé the bracketed sequence of sympo-
sium papers and other items devoted to this interest. These
papers and their handouts are the models for the studying and
exhibiting of the data. Notes on the comments and questions
raised to applicant's papers at symposia were carefully kept,
and figure importantly, as do also notes and contents of the
other papers in the same symposia. The study will allow not
only for further studying in already familiar areas, but for
expansion into new source data.
Please
Timetable for the study is for each language pair to be
pursued on a two-month basis, that is, brought to pre-publica-
tion form on paper.
It is felt that this will allow for a pace
that is neither over-burdened nor hurried. "Sandwiched" between
2