Arthur P. Sorensen, Ph.D.
76 No. Kensico Ave.
White Plains, NY 10604
25 May 1988
(A run-down of what is still being re-worded in the proposal.)
NEH Grant for Independent Scholars
If granted, will run for 1989. Proposal deadline 1st June.
Exploration and Survey on "Exclusively" Suffixing Languages
i.e., those with no prefix morphemes
Using my dissertation language, Tukano, as base for comparison
and contrast:
Tukano & Quechua; Tukano & Aymara; Tukano & Tarascan;
Tukano & Nootka (polysynthetic--a dissertation that I
haven't seen yet); Tukano & "Eskimo" (polysynthetic);
Tukano & a Turkic language (avoiding Turkish because of
the many literary Persian and Arabic influences in it)
Implications for Typology, especially Sapirian
"Exclusively" suffixing languages form, I feel, a further
subtype, thereby refining Sapir's typology. (This point
will be developed, but is not the major thrust of the
study.)
Implications for Classification (--phylum and comparative--)
Tukano & Quechua are both exclusively suffixing languages,
and both belong to Greenberg's hypothetical Andean-Equa-
torial Phylum. However, there are no form-and-meaning
resemblances between them. Furthermore, their suffix sys-
tems are at great variance with each other, making any
approach to a genetic classification remote. However,
there are a very few shared concepts or meaning classes
that are always found suffixed, and even with a little
bit of agreement on the location of these suffixes vis-a-
vis each other and the word stem, and these "parallels"
will be explored. The possibility of a kind of typologi-
cal structural pressuring will be explored.
Implications for Methodology
An annotated bibliography will be kept on those languages
that come to attention in the survey (which will not neces-
sarily be exhaustive). These annotations will be critiques
on the usefulness of these descriptions. Inasmuch as my
dissertation on the structure of Tukano was the first modern
linguistic description of any Tukanoan language, I will be
interested in examining subsequent Tukanoan descriptions;
then, descriptions of other Andean-Equatorial languages and
other South American Indian languages; and those on still
other languages as they are used in the study.
My stand point is that morphology-oriented grammars are the
most applicable, the most revealing, for agglutinative lan-
guages.
Results of the study will take the form of a series of articles.
Articles on comparisons & contrasts between Tukano and
another language (each pair separably publishable) will
first be submitted as a collection for publication as a
"special publication" to a data-oriented linguistics jour-