Code of Ethics, page two
(d) Native community consultants have the right to remain
anonymous cr be specifically named and given credit if they so choose.
This right should be respected where it has been explicitly promised.
Where there is no clear understanding to the contrary, sources should
be kept confidential. Because funded proposals, grant reports and
other written material in the Endowment's possession are available
to the public, no identifications contrary to the wishes of community
consultants should appear.
(e) Investigators using recording devices such as cameras or
tape recorders or the technique of oral interviewing are also subject
to the above criteria. Subjects under study should understand the
capacities of such machines and should be free to accept or reject
their use.
(f) Individuals or group community consultants should be fairly
compensated (through reciprocal exchange or monetary payment) for their
services/information and there may be no exploitation of subjects under
Scholars should make every attempt to guarantee appropriate
credit (in the form of co-authorship, co-curatorship or co-investigator-
ship) and the distribution of financial rewards where appropriate for
products resulting from projects.
study.
(g) Any report or work considered for publication (and where
applicable and possible, films or exhibitions) should be deposited with
the Native representatives of the elders and traditional leaders of the
community. Every effort should be made to see that such a representational
body has an opportunity to view the films or exhibitions which result
from work undertaken in the community.
(h) This Code should not interfere with or preclude any formal
agreements made between researchers and Native peoples for the course
of research undertaken with Federal funds. Further, the Code does not
preclude or supercede ethical codes, subscribed to and endorsed by
various professional associations, but rather, intends only to make
clear the standards expected of those receiving Endowment funds.
Arthur P. Sorensen
(Name) Arthur P. Sorensen
Application for Fellowship for Independent Scholars
PL
• xclusively Suffixing Languages"
31 May 1988
(Date)