UNDE AVLS and
these two-month goals will be the development of the other
topical aspects as they arise. This not only leaves lattitude
for survey and trial runs, but for the development of unexpect-
edly pertinent pairs of languages or, likewise, for describing
unexpectedly rich substantiation in some topical area. Frame-
work of a typological and methodological statement will be
developed by the seventh or eighth month--in order partly not
to defer it as a separate enterprise after the end of working
the data, but rather to phase it in; and partly in order to
follow it out in tentative approval with the remaining pairs
of languages.
Results of the study will take the form of a series of
articles and symposium papers. Comparisons and contrasts be-
tween Tukano and another language, each pair perhaps separably
publishable, will first be submitted as a collection for a
"special publication" to a data-oriented linguistics journal.
The annotated bibliography will be submitted to a more general
linguistics or anthropology journal; perhaps one or more indivi-
dual sources may merit its own review. A general typological
and methodological statement will be abstracted from the more
data-oriented work and will be submitted to a general journal.
As sufficient substantiation appears in the study, individual
articles will be developed on specific symposium-type topics
and appropriately submitted. Symposium papers will be developed
for at least the 1989 and 1990 American Anthropological Associ-
ation Annual Meetings; for Kenneth Kensinger's Lowland South
Americanist meetings in the summers in Vermont; and, if amenable
to their annual themes, for the Georgetown Roundtables in March.
With respect to the applicant's long-range scholarly
objectives and to his development as an interpreter of the
humanities, the applicant regards the proposed study as an
opportunity to express his stand in language and linguistics--
that of a particular approach, gained and stabilized over the
period of a long and theoretically uninterrupted training and
experience, and focused upon familiarity with a certain array
of languages--a stand that will continue on to typify his
subsequent work. To the humanities in general, he regards
this study as an opportunity to add his own degree of skill
to the exemplification of practice in what this era of linguis-
tics has to offer--to add to a particular intellectual tradition.
There is a complementary relationship between the proposed
work and the work of others in the same field. Similar concerns.
are addressed. Technical background is immediately ascertain-
able. It is not a study in isolation. What is distinct lies
compositely in the typological base for selection of the langu-
ages, namely exclusively suffixing languages, and in the parti-
cular pairs of languages not otherwise soon likely to be com-
pared or contrasted.
838/3 NO1103 %92
W'SO DA HIHOMHINOS
AID
3