The applicant is a native speaker of American English,
and is fully fluent in (Colombian) Spanish; he handles research
materials in these with ease. He has a speaking knowledge of
Tukano (and of a provincial dialect of Jutish Danish preserved
a century in America by his paternal grand parents); he can
understand but not speak certain other Tukanoan languages.
With dictionaries and grammar books he can handle research
materials in Portuguese, Scandinavian languages, Latin (four
years of high school Latin occasionally reviewed), French,
Italian, German, and Dutch, in this order of increasing diffi-
culty. Most source materials will be in English.
The study will be conducted at home.
materials--see bibliography--will be acquired.
convenient access to the major specialized library holdings
in New York City. Correspondence and telephone contact will
be maintained with linguists knowledgeable in the source
languages; some visits for personal conferences will be planned.
Principle source.
Applicant has
BIBLIOGRAPHY
(Please note that the study includes surveying the literature
for pertinent, suffix-bearing languages.)
International Journal of American Linguistics
selected descriptive materials
Summer Institute of Linguistics Publications
selected descriptive and pedagogical materials
University of California Publications in Linguistics
selected descriptions
Callaghan, Catherine A. Northern Sierra Miwok Dictionary.
Univ. of Calif. Pub. in Linguistics, Vol. 106.
Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: Univ. of Calif. Press. 1984.
Derbyshire, Desmond C. and Geoffrey K. Pullum (eds.)
Handbook of Amazonian Languages, Volume 1
Berlin, New York, Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruyter. 1986.
Stanford,
Greenberg, Joseph H. Language in the Americas.
California: Stanford University Press. 1987.
Hardman, Martha J.
Cultural Context.
The Aymara Language in its Social and
Gainesville, Florida. 1981.
Cochabamba Quechua Syntax.
Cochabamba Quechua Syntax.
Lastra, Yolanda.
The Hague. 1968.
Sapir, Edward. Language. New York: Harcourt, Brace and
Company. 1921. (Paperback, A Harvest Book, Harcourt, Brace
and Company. nd.)
4