nal. The annotated bibliography will be submitted to a
more general linguistics or anthropology journal. Per-
haps one or more individual sources may merit its own
review, which will be submitted to a linguistics journal.
A "general" typological & methodological statement (i.e.,
one with the barest amount of empirical data in it) will
be submitted to a general anthropological journal.
Work in the course of the study will furnish materials
for symposium papers at the 1989 and 1990 AAA Annual
Meetings; for presentation at Ken Kensinger's Lowlandist
Meetings in the summer in Vermont; and, if amenable to
their annual theme, for presentation at the Georgetown
Roundtables in March.
Timetable: Each language pair will be pursued on a two-month
basis, (i.e., brought to a pre-publication form on paper).
"Sandwiched" between these will be the development of
other aspects as they arise, and the preparation of ab-
stracts for papers. This leaves lattitude for unexpec-
tedly pertinent pairs of languages that may come to my
attention. The framework of the (empirical data-based)
typological and methodological statement will be developed
in the seventh or eighth month of the study, in order to
follow it out in tentative approval with the remaining
pairs of languages (but without imposing it as a model).
Work will be done at home. Correspondence and telephone
contact will be maintained, with perhaps some personal
visits for conferences.
The groundwork for the study has already been laid in symposium
papers and their hand outs:
"Suffixational Infelicities in Andean-Equatorial Languages"
AAA Annual Meeting, Washington, DC 1980
"Continually Liking to Start in Suffixing Languages" ditto 1982
"Can 'Can' Become a Suffix?" AAA Annual Meeting, Wash. DC 1985
"Number Range in Tukano, and the Dual-and-Paucal"
Mary Haas Festival Conference, Santa Cruz, Calif., 1986
"Yes and No, but Maybe So?" AAA Annual Meet., Phila. PA 1986
"Whether to Relativize Tukano Participles" ditto Chicago, IL 1987
"Reconsiderations from Eastern Tukanoan for Amerindian"
Abstract submitted for AAA Annual Meeting at Phoenix, 1988
(Critique of data Greenburg used in his phylum linguistics)
Also note: lengthy, unpublished abstract "on hold" for a typo-
logical conference:
"Tukano: A Morphologically Weighted Agglutinative Language"
Also note: Review of Derbyshire & Pullum's Handbook of South
of M4
American Indian Languages, Vol. 1, published in AA Dec. 1987.
To the humanities in general, this study represents part of the
culmination of a certain era in (anthropological) linguis-
tics. It is the exemplification of a particular approach,
a particular training, uninterrupted over a period of many
years, done with the technical skill gained over this period
of time. It represents the applicant's stand in (anthropo-
logical) linguistics. It deals with certain languages not
otherwise soon likely to be compared and contrasted. It
presents (cautious) implications for methodological, classi-
ficational, and typological concerns.
A.P.S.