The cnysinzal dak
then can be extracted
for
others
own use, reanity.
by
their
Charts and diagrams
hearly,
will figure
prominently.
Addressing specific
grammatical
points of the
sort that symposiz
center on.
skill
Use of & fusional-isolatry
uage for descrity
I poly synth,
for
What Form Likely to Assume
The results of this study will take the form of a series of
articles. The several sets of comparisons between Tukano and ano-
ther language, while submittable singly, will first be submitted
as a collection for publication as a "special publication" to a
data-oriented linguistics journal. --Several of which, namely the
comparisons and contrasts of the several pairs of languages, will
be submitted to a data-oriented linguistics journal as a prospective
"special publication" The annotated bibliography will be sub-
mmitted to a more general linguistic or anthropological journal.
The typological and methodological statement--findings, conclusions,
or impressions--in typology and methodology--while it may be ap-
propriate to be included in the "special publication" will be
submitted to a more general anthropological and linguistic journal
as well. Some of the results will also take the form of conference
papers for the AAA 1989 and 1990; for the Lowland Conference in
Vermont each summer; in the summers of those years; and possibly
in other conferences such as the Northeastern Anthropological Associ-
ation, and at the Georgetown Roundtable providing the material is
pertinent to the Roundtable theme chose for that year (1989, 1990).
It is time now
the applicant to
resent .......
Such special publication will be submitted immediately upon
termination of the tenure of the grant (December) so that the
editorial and proofreading details can be attended to by the applicant
during the following year. Note that the applicant's enfatuation
with suffixing languages will not be "cured"--but will continue,
anyway. No publisher has been approached.
Long-range Scholarly Objectives, and Development as an Interpreter
of the Humanities
mature
This study will represents a stage in applicant's interest in
languages, especially agglutinative languages. It will imply ap-
plicant's understanding, applicant's view of what language is,
stand, so to speak, on languages; my tand in linguistics;
the results of my own particular long experience with a certain kind
of language; with a long period of a certain training and familiarity
--a particular approach. It represents a particular era in linguis-
tics.
continuing --the perfection, if you will--
It represents the
of a particular approach to the study of language, carried on without
interruption or diverting to another approach, without adopting new
techniques. --The development, the presentation of a particular
skill in linguistics, in language.
Contribution to the Field of Study Source of some ideas.
Extractable.
In a way obemight say that it represents the unfinished business
in the areas of typology, methodology, classification where others
have dropped what they were doing and have gone on into newer interests.
of others
certson, Emcount of coverage.
To the humanities in general, again, it represents a certain
era--the fulfillment of an era in linguistics and in anthropology--
an exemplification of it,
1
Relationship of This Study with That of Others
With the particular pairs of languages chosen, it may not be
a duplicate of the studies of others; it is similar to the kind of
studies going on to some extent on the part of a number of people;
such that it is not a study in isolation. It has relevance to cur-
rent work on the part of a number of people--those still using de-
scriptive models. Its theoretical results have relevance to people
working in typology. It can furnish and understanding to what is
I where should this go?]