qullqintaqa mana waqaychasqachu, chay llakiy puriyninmanta juk ñiqi phatmanta
qanchik ñiqi phatmakama allinta ch'uwanchaspa, yuyaytapis mast'arasqatajina kay
p'anqataqa ñawirichiwanchik. Chayrayku may kusaq jawariymin ñispa ñuqa ñiyman.
The story of Faustino's life from when he was a little boy up until he was an old
man, how he grew from a small boy in the town Kalallusta, got married, and then
went to Cochabamba to work, and even though he worked, he didn't keep his
money, the story of him going through this sadness crystalizes from Chapter 1 to
Chapter 7, we are made to read the book as an extended memory. This is why I can
say this is a great story.
Nawpaqtaqa Faustinuqa Fransisku, Inkarna tatan mamanwan juch'uy kaspaqa
kawsakusqa, chanta ña wayna kaspari payqa Fransiska sipaswan sawachakusqa.
Sawachakuy raymipiri warminpa yawarmasillan Muruq'u Urqu ayllupi sawachasqanku,
Faustinup yawarmasinri mana achkhachu kasqa, chay p'unchawpacha runaqa kay qhari-
warmiri mana sumaqtachu kawsakunqa ñispa parlasqanku. Chaymanjinapuni
watamanta wata paykunapaq mana allinchu kasqa. Faustinuqa phusilwan
awqanakuymanpis ayllu runawan khuska risqa, kutimullasqataq; chanta Quchapampa
jatun llaqtaman risqa, chaypi aqha upyay kawsayman yaykuspa qullqintapis qhasillaman
chikchasqa.
In the beginning, Faustino is small and lives with his mother Inkarna and father
Fransisco, then when he is a young man he marries Francisca. For the wedding,
they get married with just the woman's family in Muruq'u Urqu, not many of
Faustino's family were there, that day people don't speak well about the life of this
bride and groom. And just like they said, year by year it isn't good for them.
Faustino goes with a gun to fight together with his fellow townspeople, and then
he comes back; then he goes to the big city of Cochabamba, where he enters the
life of drinking chicha, and spends all his money on nothing.
Gladys Camacho pananchikpa jawariyninqa yaqa chiqapuni; achkha runap kawsayninqa
jinapuni, chayrayku payqa p'anqanwan may sumaqta
t'ukurichiwanchik,
7
